 


 


explain why isotopes of the same element have different physical


 


 


 


BEFORE YOU START
Without looking at the Periodic Table, make a list of the names and symbols for the elements in
Periods 1, 2 and 3. Compare your list with another learner then check to see if the symbols are


correct.
How can you deduce the formula of a simple ion (e.g. a chloride ion or an aluminium ion) by


reference to the Periodic Table?
Take turns in challenging another learner to write down the formula of a simple ion. Check your


answers afterwards using a textbook.
Make a list of the subatomic particles in an atom giving their relative mass and relative charges
well as their position in the atom, structure of the atom and isotopes. Compare your answers with


those of another learner. Were you in agreement?
Write down a definition of the term Put a circle around the three most important words in


your definition. Compare your definition to the one in a textbook.
What do the terms mass number and proton number mean? Write down your definitions and


compare yours with another learner.
Ask another learner to use a data book or the internet to select an isotope. Use this data to deduce


the number of protons, neutrons and electrons in an atom or ion of this isotope, e.g. Cr atom or


If you are unsure, check your answer with someone else in the class or with a teacher.
Take a photocopy of the modern Periodic Table and cross out or cut out the group numbers and
period numbers. Get another learner to select an element. You then have to state in which period
and group that element belongs. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that you can easily


identify the group and period of an element.
Ask another learner to select an element. You then have to state if the element is a metal, non-
metal or metalloid (metalloids have some characteristics of both metals and non-metals). If you are
both uncertain, consult a textbook or the internet. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that


you can easily identify the position of metals, non-metals and metalloids.
Explain to another learner in terms of numbers of electrons and protons why a sodium ion has a


single positive charge but an oxide ion has a charge.
Explain to another learner what you know about attraction or repulsion of positive and negative


charges.


DEVELOPING AN IDEA: NANOMACHINES


 
Progress in science depends not only on original thinking but also on developing the ideas of other
people. The idea of an atom goes back over 2000 years to the Greek philosopher Demokritos. About
350 years ago, Robert Boyle looked again at the idea of small particles but there was no proof. John
Dalton moved a step closer to proving that atoms exist: he developed the idea that atoms of the same
kind had the same weight, thinking this could explain the results of experiments on combining


different substances in terms of rearrangement of the atoms.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Thomson (see Figure 1.6) suggested three models of the
atom. His preferred model was to imagine an atom as a spherical cloud of positive charge in which
electrons were placed. A few years later, scientists working under the direction of Ernest Rutherford
(see Figure 1.4) fired alpha particles (which we now know are positively charged helium nuclei) at very
high speeds at strips of metal only 0.0005 mm thick. Most of the alpha particles went through the
strip. This would fit with the idea of atoms being a cloud of charge with very little mass to deflect
(change the direction of) the alpha particles. But one alpha particle in every 20 000 was deflected at
an angle of more than 90°. From this, Rutherford deduced that there must be something very small


and positively charged in the atom. The atomic nucleus had been discovered!
In 1960 Richard Feynman (Figure 1.1) suggested that tiny machines could be made from a few
hundred atoms grouped together in clusters. At the time, these ideas seemed like ‘science fiction’. But


several scientists took up the challenge and the science of nanotechnology was born.


 


 


Figure 1.1: Richard Feynman.


 
In nanotechnology, scientists design and make objects that may have a thickness of only a few
thousand atoms or less. Groups of atoms can be moved around on special surfaces (Figure 1.2). In this
way, scientists have started to develop tiny machines that will help deliver medical drugs to exactly

where they are needed in the body.






 
Figure 1.2: Each of the blue peaks in this image is an individual molecule. The molecules can be moved over a


copper surface, making this a molecular abacus or counting device.

 

Questions for discussion

Discuss with another learner or group of learners:

do you think that tiny clusters of atoms are useful for catalysts?
do you think that you could make tiny clusters of metal atoms on a cold surface?


Tip: Think about breathing onto a cold surface.


What other uses could be made of tiny clusters of atoms?
What advantages and disadvantages could there be in using tiny clusters of atoms to help deliver


medical drugs and in cancer treatment?

else do you think nanomachines could be used for?
