


Introduction
This book covers the entire syllabus of Cambridge International AS & A Level Chemistry (9701) for


examination from 2022. This book is in three parts:
Chapters 1-18 and P1: the AS Level content, covered in the first year of the course, including a chapter


(P1) dedicated to the development of your practical skills
Chapters 19-30 and P2: the A Level content, including a chapter (P2) dedicated to developing your


ability to plan, analyse and evaluate practical investigations


Appendices: including a Periodic Table, useful formulae and reactions, a glossary and an index.
The main aims of a textbook like this are to explain the various concepts of chemistry that you need to
understand, and to provide you with questions that will help you to test your understanding and develop
the key skills needed to succeed on this course. The ‘How to use this book’ pages show the structure of


each chapter and the features of this book.
In your study of chemistry, you will find that certain key concepts are repeated, and that these concepts
form ‘themes’ that link the different areas of chemistry together. You will progress and gain confidence in
your understanding of chemistry if you take note of these themes. For this coursebook, these key concepts

include:

Atoms and forces

Experiments and evidence

Patterns in chemical behaviour and reactions

Chemical bonds


Energy changes
Studying chemistry is a stimulating and worthwhile experience. It is an international subject; no single


country has a monopoly on the development of the ideas. It can be a rewarding exercise to discover how
men and women from many countries have contributed to our knowledge and well-being, through their

research into and application of the concepts of chemistry.
We hope not only that this book will help you to succeed in your future studies and career, but also that it
will stimulate your curiosity and your imagination. Today’s students become the next generation of
scientists and engineers, and we hope that you will learn from the past to take chemistry to ever-greater
heights.


images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Without looking at the Periodic Table, make a list of the names and symbols for the elements in
Periods 1, 2 and 3. Compare your list with another learner then check to see if the symbols are


correct.
How can you deduce the formula of a simple ion (e.g. a chloride ion or an aluminium ion) by


reference to the Periodic Table?
Take turns in challenging another learner to write down the formula of a simple ion. Check your


answers afterwards using a textbook.
Make a list of the subatomic particles in an atom giving their relative mass and relative charges as
well as their position in the atom, structure of the atom and isotopes. Compare your answers with


those of another learner. Were you in agreement?
Write down a definition of the term isotope. Put a circle around the three most important words in


your definition. Compare your definition to the one in a textbook.
What do the terms mass number and proton number mean? Write down your definitions and


compare yours with another learner.
Ask another learner to use a data book or the internet to select an isotope. Use this data to deduce
the number of protons, neutrons and electrons in an atom or ion of this isotope, e.g. Cr atom or


Cr3+ ion. If you are unsure, check your answer with someone else in the class or with a teacher.
Take a photocopy of the modern Periodic Table and cross out or cut out the group numbers and
period numbers. Get another learner to select an element. You then have to state in which period
and group that element belongs. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that you can easily


identify the group and period of an element.
Ask another learner to select an element. You then have to state if the element is a metal, non-
metal or metalloid (metalloids have some characteristics of both metals and non-metals). If you are
both uncertain, consult a textbook or the internet. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that


you can easily identify the position of metals, non-metals and metalloids.
Explain to another learner in terms of numbers of electrons and protons why a sodium ion has a


single positive charge but an oxide ion has a 2— charge.
Explain to another learner what you know about attraction or repulsion of positive and negative


charges.


DEVELOPING AN IDEA: NANOMACHINES


 
Progress in science depends not only on original thinking but also on developing the ideas of other
people. The idea of an atom goes back over 2000 years to the Greek philosopher Demokritos. About
350 years ago, Robert Boyle looked again at the idea of small particles but there was no proof. John
Dalton moved a step closer to proving that atoms exist: he developed the idea that atoms of the same
kind had the same weight, thinking this could explain the results of experiments on combining


different substances in terms of rearrangement of the atoms.
At the beginning of the 20th century, J.J. Thomson (see Figure 1.6) suggested three models of the
atom. His preferred model was to imagine an atom as a spherical cloud of positive charge in which
electrons were placed. A few years later, scientists working under the direction of Ernest Rutherford
(see Figure 1.4) fired alpha particles (which we now know are positively charged helium nuclei) at very
high speeds at strips of metal only 0.0005 mm thick. Most of the alpha particles went through the
strip. This would fit with the idea of atoms being a cloud of charge with very little mass to deflect
(change the direction of) the alpha particles. But one alpha particle in every 20 000 was deflected at
an angle of more than 90°. From this, Rutherford deduced that there must be something very small

and positively charged in the atom. The atomic nucleus had been discovered!
In 1960 Richard Feynman (Figure 1.1) suggested that tiny machines could be made from a few
hundred atoms grouped together in clusters. At the time, these ideas seemed like ‘science fiction’. But
several scientists took up the challenge and the science of nanotechnology was born.


 


Figure 1.1: Richard Feynman.


 
In nanotechnology, scientists design and make objects that may have a thickness of only a few
thousand atoms or less. Groups of atoms can be moved around on special surfaces (Figure 1.2). In this
way, scientists have started to develop tiny machines that will help deliver medical drugs to exactly


where they are needed in the body.

4 4

4

4
44m


4


 
Figure 1.2: Each of the blue peaks in this image is an individual molecule. The molecules can be moved over a


copper surface, making this a molecular abacus or counting device.

 

Questions for discussion

Discuss with another learner or group of learners:

e Why do you think that tiny clusters of atoms are useful for catalysts?
e How do you think that you could make tiny clusters of metal atoms on a cold surface?


Tip: Think about breathing onto a cold surface.


What other uses could be made of tiny groups / clusters of atoms?
What advantages and disadvantages could there be in using tiny clusters of atoms to help deliver


medical drugs and in cancer treatment?


What else do you think nanomachines could be used for?


 


1.1 Elements and atoms
Every substance in our world is made up from chemical elements. These chemical elements cannot be
broken down further into simpler substances by chemical means. A few elements, such as nitrogen and
gold, are found on their own in nature, not combined with other elements. Most elements, however, are


found in combination with other elements as compounds.
Every element has its own chemical symbol. The symbols are often derived from Latin or Greek words.


Some examples are shown in Table 1.1.


Li (from Greek ‘lithos’)
Fe (from Latin ‘ferrum’)


K (from Arabic ‘al-qualyah’ or from the Latin ‘kalium’)


Table 1.1: Some examples of chemical symbols.


 

 
Chemical elements contain only one type of atom. An atom is the smallest part of an element that can
take part in a chemical change. Atoms are very small. The diameter of a hydrogen atom is approximately
m, so the mass of an atom is also very small. A single hydrogen atom weighs only 1.67 x 10-27 kg.


1.2 Inside the atom


The structure of an atom
Every atom has nearly all of its mass concentrated in a tiny region in the centre of the atom called the
nucleus. The nucleus is made up of particles called nucleons. There are two types of nucleon: protons and


neutrons. Atoms of different elements have different numbers of protons.
Outside the nucleus, particles called electrons move around in regions of space called orbitals (see
Section 2.3). Chemists often find it convenient to use a simpler model of the atom in which electrons move
around the nucleus in electron shells. Each shell is a certain distance from the nucleus at its own particular
energy level (see Section 2.3). In a neutral atom, the number of electrons is equal to the number of


protons. A simple model of a carbon atom is shown in Figure 1.3.


electron


nucleus
electron shells


(energy levels)


proton neutron
Figure 1.3: A model of a carbon atom. This model is not very accurate but it is useful for understanding what happens to


the electrons during chemical reactions.


 


IMPORTANT
When we use a simple model of the atom we talk about shells (n = 1, n = 2, etc) and sub-shells 2s, 2p,
etc. In this model, the electrons are at a fixed distance from the nucleus. This model is useful when we


discuss ionisation energies (Chapter 2).


 
When we discuss where the electrons really are in space, we use the orbital model. In this model, there is a
probability of finding a particular electron within certain area of space outside the nucleus. We use this


model for discussing bonding and referring to electrons in the sub-shells.
Atoms are tiny, but the nucleus of an atom is much smaller. If the diameter of an atom were the size of a
football stadium, the nucleus would only be the size of a pea. This means that most of the atom is empty


space! Electrons are even smaller than protons and neutrons.


 
Figure 1.4: Ernest Rutherford (left) and Hans Geiger (right) using their alpha particle apparatus. Interpretation of the


results led to Rutherford proposing the nuclear model for atoms.


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 1.1


 


Experiments with subatomic particles
We can deduce the electric charge of subatomic particles by showing how beams of electrons, protons
and neutrons behave in electric fields. If we fire a beam of electrons past electrically charged plates,
the electrons are deflected (change direction) away from the negative plate and towards the positive
plate (Figure 1.5a). This shows us that the electrons are negatively charged because opposite charges


attract each other and like charges repel each other.
A cathode-ray tube (Figure 1.5b) can be used to produce beams of electrons. At one end of the tube is
a metal wire (cathode), which is heated to a high temperature when a low voltage is applied to it. At


the other end of the tube is a fluorescent screen, which glows when electrons hit it.


cathode
    
     


     


electron


beam rays


fluorescent
screen
with scale
charged

plates (anode)

magnets causing


electromagnetic
field beam deflected


downwards
Figure 1.5: a The beam of electrons is deflected away from a negatively charged plate and towards a positively
charged plate. b The electron beam in a cathode-ray tube is deflected by an electromagnetic field. The direction of


the deflection shows us that the electron is negatively charged.


 
The electrons are given off from the heated wire and are attracted towards two metal plates, which are
positively charged. As they pass through the metal plates, the electrons form a beam. When the
electron beam hits the screen a spot of light is produced. When an electric field is applied across this
beam the electrons are deflected. The fact that the electrons are so easily attracted to the positively


charged anode and that they are easily deflected by an electric field shows us that:


e electrons have a negative charge


e electrons have a very small mass.

 
Figure 1.6: J. J. Thomson calculated the charge to mass ratio of electrons. He used results from experiments with


electrons in cathode-ray tubes.


 
In recent years, experiments have been carried out with beams of electrons, protons and neutrons


moving at the same velocity in an electric field.
protons detected on


walls of apparatus


protons


+
Figure 1.7: A beam of protons is deflected away from a positively charged area. This shows us that protons have a


positive charge.


 


The results of these experiments show that:
beam is deflected away from a positively charged plate; as like charges repel, the protons


must have a positive charge (Figure 1.7)
e anelectron beam is deflected towards a positively charged plate; as opposite charges attract, the


electrons must have a negative charge


abeam of neutrons is not deflected; this shows that they are uncharged.
In these experiments, huge voltages have to be used to deflect the proton beam. This contrasts with
the very low voltages needed to deflect an electron beam. These experiments show us that protons
are much heavier than electrons. If we used the same voltage to deflect electrons and protons, the
beam of electrons would have a far greater deflection than the beam of protons. This is because a


proton is about 2000 times heavier than an electron.


IMPORTANT


Remember that like charges repel each other and unlike charges attract each other.


Question


 
of electrons is passing close to a highly negatively charged plate. When the electrons pass


close to the plate, they are deflected away from the plate.
deflection would you expect, if any, when the experiment is repeated with beams of i


protons and ii neutrons? Explain your answers.
b subatomic particle (electron, proton or neutron) would deviate the most? Explain your


answer.


Masses and charges: a summary
Electrons, protons and neutrons have characteristic charges and masses. The values of these are too small
to be very useful when discussing general chemical properties. For example, the charge on a single
electron is —1.602 x coulombs. We therefore compare their masses and charges by using their
relative charges and masses. These are not the actual charges and masses. They are the charges and


masses compared with each other in a simple ratio. These are shown in Table 1.2.


 
electron


1836


neutron n


0


 

Table 1.2: Comparing electrons, neutrons and protons.



1.3 Numbers of nucleons


Atomic (proton) number and mass (nucleon) number
The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is called the atomic number (proton number) (Z). Every
atom of the same element has the same number of protons in its nucleus. It is the atomic number that
makes an atom what it is. For example, an atom with an atomic number of 11 must be an atom of the
element sodium. No other element can have 11 protons in its nucleus. The Periodic Table of elements is


arranged in order of the atomic numbers of the individual elements (see Appendix 1).

The mass number (nucleon number) (A) is the number of protons plus neutrons in the nucleus of an atom.

How many neutrons?
We can use the mass number and atomic number to find the number of neutrons in an atom. As:


mass number = number of protons + number of neutrons

Then:


number of neutrons = mass number — atomic number
=A-Z
For example, an atom of aluminium has a mass number of 27 and an atomic number of 13. So an


aluminium atom has 27 — 13 = 14 neutrons.
Question
2 the information in Table 1.3 to deduce the number of electrons and neutrons in a neutral atom of:


vanadium


b


phosphorus


Table 1.3: Information table for Question 2


 


 


Isotopes
All atoms of the same element have the same number of protons. However, they may have different
numbers of neutrons. Atoms of the same element that have different numbers of neutrons are called


isotopes.


Isotopes are atoms of the same element with different mass numbers.
Isotopes of a particular element have the same chemical properties because they have the same number
of electrons. They have slightly different physical properties, such as small differences in density or small


differences in mass, because they have different numbers of neutrons.
We can write symbols for isotopes. We write the nucleon number at the top left of the chemical symbol and


the proton number at the bottom left.


The symbol for the isotope of boron with 5 protons and 11 nucleons is written
nucleon number ———> 1


proton number ———> 5
Hydrogen has three isotopes. The atomic structure and isotopic symbols for the three isotopes of hydrogen


are shown in Figure 1.8.


protium deuterium tritium
) neutron



protons 1 1 1


neutrons 0 1 2
isotopic 2


iH iH


Figure 1.8: The atomic structure and isotopic symbols for the three isotopes of hydrogen.


 
When writing generally about isotopes, chemists also name them by leaving out the proton number and
placing the mass number after the name. For example, the isotopes of hydrogen can be called hydrogen-1,


hydrogen-2 and hydrogen-3.


Remember that in writing isotopes, mass number is the figure which is superscript.
Isotopes can be radioactive or non-radioactive. Specific radioisotopes (radioactive isotopes) can be used to
check for leaks in oil or gas pipelines and to check the thickness of paper. They are also used in medicine


to treat some types of cancer and to check the activity of the thyroid gland in the throat.
Question
3 the Periodic Table in Appendix 1 to help you.
isotopic symbols for the following neutral atoms:




How many protons, neutrons and electrons?
In a neutral atom the number of positively charged protons in the nucleus equals the number of negatively
charged electrons outside the nucleus. When an atom gains or loses electrons, ions are formed, which are


electrically charged. For example:
cl
chlorine atom 1 electron gained chloride ion
17 protons 17 protons


17 electrons 18 electrons


The chloride ion has a single negative charge because there are 17 protons (+) and 18 electrons
Mg +
magnesium atom magnesium ion 2 electrons
removed
12 protons 12 protons


10 electrons 10 electrons


The magnesium ion has a charge of 2+ because it has 12 protons (+) but only 10 electrons (—).
The isotopic symbol for an ion derived from sulfur-33 is This sulfide ion has 16 protons, 17 neutrons

(because 33 — 16 = 17) and 18 electrons (because 16 + 2 = 18).
IMPORTANT


lons: charged particles formed by the loss or gain of electrons from an atom or group of covalently
bonded atoms. Remember that positive ions are formed when one or more electrons are by an


atom and that negative ions are formed when one or more electrons are gained by an atom.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


Deduce the number of electrons in the ion 33Cr?*.
Solution


Step 1: Work out the number of protons. This is the subscripted number 24.
Step 2: Number of protons = number of electrons in the neutral atom. So number of electrons in


the atom is 24.
Step 3: Fora positive ion subtract the number of charges (because electrons have been lost from
the atom). For a negative ion add the number of charges (because electrons have been


gained).


So for Cr2*, 24 — 2 = 22 electrons.


 


Questions


4 the number of electrons in each of these ions:





d
5 which one of the following ways are isotopes of the same element exactly the same?
Thesum of the number of electrons and the number of neutrons in each atom.
mass of the nucleus in each atom.
The number of electrons in each atom.
of the number of protons and the number of neutrons in each atom.
6 Deduce the number of electrons, protons and neutrons in each of these ions:


REFLECTION
Read the paragraph in ‘Developing an idea: Nanomachines’ at the beginning of this chapter about


Rutherford’s work in discovering the nucleus. Discuss these questions with another learner:
Why, in Rutherford’s experiments, did most of the alpha particles go straight through the metal foil


and so few bounced back?
Suggest what happened to the alpha particles that went a little way from the nucleus. Use ideas of


attractive or repulsive forces.
Use your knowledge of what you have learned in this chapter to think about any other


experiments that could have been used.


How much did you contribute to the discussion? Could you have contributed more?


SUMMARY


Beams of protons and electrons are deflected by electric fields but neutrons are not.
The atom consists of positively charged protons and neutral neutrons in the nucleus, surrounded by negatively


charged electrons arranged in energy levels (shells).
Isotopes are atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers. They only differ in the number of

neutrons they contain.



 


 


Boron is an element in Group 13 of the Periodic Table.


Boron has two isotopes.
Deduce the number of i protons, ii neutrons and iii electrons in one neutral atom of the


isotope [3]


What do you understand by the term isotope? [1]


State the relative masses and charges of:
[2]
ii aneutron [2]


[2]


[Total: 10]


Zirconium, Zr, and hafnium, Hf, are metals.


An isotope of zirconium has 40 protons and 91 nucleons.
i Write the isotopic symbol for this isotope of zirconium. [1]


ii | State the number of neutrons present in one atom of this isotope. [1]
The symbol for a particular ion of hafnium ion is
Deduce the number of electrons that are present in one of these hafnium ions. [1]


The subatomic particles present in zirconium and hafnium are electrons, neutrons and
protons. A beam of protons is fired into an electric field produced by two charged plates,


as shown in the diagram.


beam of


protons
i Describe how the beam of protons behaves when it passes through the gap


between the charged plates. [1]


your answer. [1]
Describe and explain what happens when a beam of neutrons passes through the gap


between the charged plates. [2]


[Total: 7]
Describe the structure of an atom, giving details of the subatomic particles present. [6]
Explain the terms atomic number and nucleon number. [2]


Copy and complete the table: [2]
Atomic Nucleon Numbers of each subatomic particle


Neutral atom | number number present


 


Explain why atoms are neutral. [1]


An oxygen atom has 8 protons in its nucleus. Explain why it cannot have 9 protons. [1]
When deducing the relative mass of an atom, the electrons are not used in the


calculation. Explain why not. [1]


[Total: 13]


The symbols below describe two isotopes of the element uranium.
235 238



State the meaning of the term isotope. [1]
State two ways in which these two isotopes of uranium are identical. [2]
State how these isotopes differ. [2]


State the number of electrons present in one U2* ion. [1]


[Total: 6]


The table below shows the two naturally occurring isotopes of chlorine.


Copy and complete the table.


number of protons


number of electrons


number of neutrons [3]


 
The relative atomic mass of chlorine is 35.5. What does this tell you about the relative


abundance of the two naturally occurring isotopes of chlorine? [2]
Magnesium chloride contains magnesium ions, and chloride ions,
why a magnesium ion is positively charged. [1]

ii Explain why a chloride ion has a single negative charge. [2]
[Total: 8]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
understand that every atom has an internal structure with a
nucleus in the centre and the negatively charged electrons


arranged in ‘shells’ outside the nucleus
understand that most of the mass of the atom is in the
nucleus, which contains protons (positively charged) and


neutrons (uncharged)
understand that beams of protons and electrons are deflected


by electric fields but neutrons are not
understand that atoms of the same element have the same
number of protons; this is called the atomic (proton) number


(Z)


 
understand that in a neutral atom, the number of electrons
equals the number of protons: when there are more protons
than electrons, the atom becomes a positive ion; when there
are more electrons than protons, a negatively charged ion is


formed
understand that isotopes are atoms with the same atomic
number but different mass numbers; they only differ in the


number of neutrons they contain.


 


images


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



 


BEFORE YOU START


What are the relative masses and relative charges of a proton and an electron?


Explain to another learner:


a_ what is meant by the terms electron shell and electronic configuration


why, in terms of electronic configuration, the gases helium, neon and argon are relatively


unreactive.
Draw a labelled diagram to show the structure of a calcium atom. Compare your drawing with that


of another learner.
Ask another learner to select one of the first 20 elements in the Periodic Table. Can you deduce the
simple electronic configuration for an atom of this element? Take turns in doing this until you are


sure that you can write simple electronic configurations.
Ask another learner to select one of the first 20 elements in the Periodic Table. Then ask them to
state the charge on the ion. This time, deduce the simple electronic configuration for the ion of this
element. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that you can write the electronic configurations


for the ions.
Ask another learner to select any element in the Periodic Table. Write an ion-electron equation such
as Mg + 2e7 for this element, making sure that the charges balance. Take turns in doing


this until you are sure that you can write this type of equation.
What prefixes do you know that can be placed before the basic unit and what is their relationship


to the basic unit? For example, a centimetre (cm) is one-hundredth of a metre (m).
Practise writing units in standard form, e.g. g / cm? becomes g (the negative 3 shows that the


cm? is the divisor). Try changing the following into standard form:



b


Compare your answers with those of another learner.


SEEING MORE DETAIL


 
If we try to study materials using an ordinary microscope with glass lenses, we find that there is a limit
to how much we can magnify something. For example, we cannot see the tiny pores in some types of
polymers (long-chain molecules). If, instead of light, we use a beam of electrons as a source of


illumination, we can increase the magnification of an object up to a million times. This is because the
wavelength of electrons can be 100 000 times shorter than the wavelength of visible light. (The
wavelength is the distance between the crests of two waves). In Section 1.2, we saw how beams of
electrons can be produced by a cathode-ray tube. We use an ‘electron gun’ similar to this to fire a
beam of electrons at a sample. In 1926, Hans Busch developed an electromagnetic lens. Other
scientists encouraged him to develop an electron microscope but it was not until 1931 that Ernst


Ruska and Max Knoll produced the first electron microscope.
In the modern electron transmission microscope, a beam of electrons is accelerated in an electric field
and focused on a specimen by an electromagnetic lens. Some electrons are transmitted through the
specimen, others are absorbed and reflected as various types of radiation. The transmitted and


reflected radiation can be absorbed onto a fluorescent screen to give an image (Figure 2.1).
The electron microscope can be used to calculate the size of pores in polymers and investigate the
surfaces of metals (see Figure 2.2) and other materials. The radiation reflected in a scanning electron


microscope can be used to identify chemical elements.
beam of


electrons


    
+ electrons
accelerated here
electromagnetic lens


(condensing lens)
Scattered elements
Specimen
transmitted electromagnetic


electron beam lens
fluorescent screen


and camera


Figure 2.1: Processes occurring in a simplified transmission electron microscope.


 


 


Figure 2.2: Coloured scanning electron micrograph of metal nanoparticles.


 
Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Why must the inside of the electron microscope be at a very low pressure so that there is hardly


any air present?


Why must the specimens studied using an electron microscope have dry surfaces?

e Why might it be useful to be able to look at a substance in more detail?



2.1 Simple electronic structure
In Section 1.2 we saw that electrons are arranged outside the nucleus in energy levels or quantum shells.
These principal energy levels or principal quantum shells (symbol n) are numbered according to how far
they are from the nucleus. The lowest energy level, n = 1, is closest to the nucleus, the energy level n = 2
is further out, and so on. The electrons in quantum shells further away from the nucleus have more energy


and are held less tightly to the nucleus.
The arrangement of electrons in an atom is called its electronic structure or electronic configuration.


The electronic configurations of lithium, neon and chlorine are shown in Figure 2.3, together with a
shorthand way of writing this structure.



lithium neon chlorine


2,8,7


Figure 2.3: The simple electronic structures of lithium, neon and chlorine. The nuclei of the atoms are not shown.


 
Table 2.1 shows the number of electrons in each of the principal quantum shells (principal energy levels)


for the first 11 elements in the Periodic Table.


Each principal quantum shell can hold a maximum number of electrons:
e shell 1: up to 2 electrons
shell 2: up to 8 electrons


shell 3: up to 18 electrons


shell 4: up to 32 electrons.



=



o


 


Table 2.1: Simple electronic configurations of the first 11 elements in the Periodic Table.


 


Question
the simple electronic configurations of the following atoms, showing the principal quantum shells


only:


sulfur; the atomic number of sulfur, Z = 16
b Z = 12
Z

potassium, Z = 19
e


2.2 Evidence for electronic structure


lonisation energy, IE
By firing high-speed electrons at atoms, scientists can work out how much energy has to be supplied to


form an ion by knocking out one electron from each atom.


The energy change that accompanies this process is called the energy (Figure 2.4).
The first ionisation energy of an element is the energy needed to remove one electron from each atom


in one mole of atoms of the element in the gaseous state to form one mole of gaseous 1+ ions.
SPECTRA OF THE METALS OF THE ALKALIES & ALKALINE EARTHS.


From the of &

1 |




| |
&



   


 


      


?




 
é









Figure 2.4: The frequencies of the lines in an atomic emission spectrum can be used to calculate a value for the


ionisation energy.


 


IMPORTANT
When writing definitions, look for the key words and try to remember these. In the definition above,
look out for where it says one mole of atoms and one mole of 1+ ions and the gaseous states. One


way of helping you to learn definitions is to write out the definition and circle the important parts.


 
lonisation energies are measured under standard conditions. The general symbol for ionisation energy is IE.


Its units are


The symbol for the first ionisation energy is IE,. Using calcium as an example:
1st ionisation energy: Ca(g) > Ca*(g) +


IE; = 590
If a second electron is removed from each ion in a mole of gaseous 1+ ions, we call it the second ionisation


energy, Again, using calcium as an example:
2nd ionisation energy: Cat(g) > +


IE, = 1150 kj
Removal of a third electron from each ion in a mole of gaseous 2+ ions is called the third ionisation energy.


Again, using calcium as an example:
3rd ionisation energy: > +


= 4940
We can continue to remove electrons from an atom until only the nucleus is left. We call this sequence of


ionisation energies successive ionisation energies.


IMPORTANT


When you write equations for successive ionisation energies, remember that:


e the atoms and ions are in the gaseous state
the charge on the ion on the right-hand side gives the number of the ionisation energy (1st, 2nd,


3rd, etc.)


 


The successive ionisation energies for the first 11 elements in the Periodic Table are shown in Table 2.2.


The data in Table 2.2 shows us that:
For each element, the successive ionisation energies increase. This is because the net positive charge
on the ion gets greater as each electron is removed. As each electron is removed there is a greater
attractive force between the positively charged protons in the nucleus and the remaining negatively


charged electrons. Therefore, more energy is needed to overcome these attractive forces.
There is a big difference between some successive ionisation energies. For nitrogen, this occurs
between the 5th and 6th ionisation energies. For sodium, the first big difference occurs between the
1st and 2nd ionisation energies. These large changes indicate that for the second of these two


ionisation energies the electron is being removed from a principal quantum shell closer to the nucleus.
For example, for the 5th ionisation energy of nitrogen, the electron being removed is from the 2nd principal
quantum shell. For the 6th ionisation energy of nitrogen, the electron being removed is from the 1st


principal quantum shell.


84 100


131 400


 

Table 2.2: Successive ionisation energies for the first 11 elements in the Periodic Table (values in



Question
2 Write equations that describe:
i the 1st ionisation energy of calcium
ii the 3rd ionisation energy of potassium


the 2nd ionisation energy of lithium


5th ionisation energy of sulfur.
The 2nd ionisation energy of nitrogen is 2860 kJ The 3rd ionisation energy of nitrogen is


4580 kJ Explain why the 3rd ionisation energy is higher.


Factors that influence ionisation energy


Four factors that influence ionisation energy are:
The size of the nuclear charge: as the atomic number (number of protons) increases, the positive
nuclear charge in the nucleus increases. The bigger the positive charge, the greater the attractive
force between the nucleus and the electrons. So, more energy is needed to overcome these attractive


forces if an electron is to be removed.


In general, ionisation energy increases as the proton number increases.
Distance of outer electrons from the nucleus: the force of attraction between positive and negative
charges decreases rapidly as the distance between them increases. So, electrons in shells further away


from the nucleus are less attracted to the nucleus than those closer to the nucleus.


In general, the further the outer electron shell is from the nucleus, the lower the ionisation energy.
Shielding effect of inner electrons: as all electrons are negatively charged, they repel each other.
Electrons in full inner shells repel electrons in outer shells. Full inner shells of electrons prevent the
outer electrons feeling the full nuclear charge. This is called shielding. The greater the shielding of
outer electrons by the inner electron shells, the lower the attractive forces between the nucleus and


the outer electrons. See Section 2.2 for information on sub-shells and how they affect shielding.
In general, the ionisation energy is lower as the number of full electron shells between the outer


electrons and the nucleus increases.
Spin-pair repulsion: electrons in the same atomic orbital in a sub-shell (see Section 2.3) repel each
other more than electrons in different atomic orbitals. This increased repulsion makes it easier to


remove an electron. So first ionisation energy is decreased.


Interpreting successive ionisation energies
Figure 2.5 shows a graph of successive ionisation energies against the number of electrons removed for
sodium. A logarithmic scale (to the base 10) is used because the values of successive ionisation energies


have such a large range.


We can deduce the following about sodium from Figure 2.5:
The first electron removed has a low first ionisation energy, when compared with the rest of the data.
It is very easily removed from the atom. It is therefore likely to be a long way from the nucleus and


well shielded by inner electron shells.
The second electron is much more difficult to remove than the first electron. There is a big jump in the
value of the ionisation energy. This suggests that the second electron is in a shell closer to the nucleus
than the first electron. Taken together, the 1st and 2nd ionisation energies suggest that sodium has


one electron in its outer shell.
From the second to the ninth electrons removed, there is only a gradual change in successive


ionisation energies. This suggests that all these eight electrons are in the same shell.
>


1
w


ionisation energy / kJ


 


 


2
T T T T T T T T T T
0123 45 67 8 9 1011


Number of electrons removed


Figure 2.5: Graph of logarithm of the ionisation energy of sodium against the number of electrons removed.


 
The 10th and 11th electrons have extremely high ionisation energies, when compared with the rest of
the data. This suggests that they are very close to the nucleus. There must be a very great force of
attraction between the nucleus and these electrons and there are no inner electrons to shield them.
The large increase in ionisation energy between the 9th and 10th electrons confirms that the 10th


electron is in a shell closer to the nucleus than the 9th electron.


Figure 2.6 shows this arrangement of electrons.


  


   
electron;
very easily
2 electrons; removed

to remove 2 8 electrons;

/ easily
removed


of



Figure 2.6: The arrangement of electrons in an atom of sodium can be deduced from the values of successive ionisation


energies.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
successive ionisation energies, IE, of an element X are shown in Table 2.3. Which group in the


Periodic Table does X belong to?


Solution
Step 1: We look for a large jump in the value of the ionisation energy. This occurs between the


removal of the 6th and 7th electrons.
Step 2: Take the lower number (this represents the number of electrons that are relatively easily


removed). This number is the number of electrons in the outer shell of X. In this case 6.
Step 3: Relate number of outer shell electrons to the group number. So, element X must be in


Group 16 of the Periodic Table.

  
Number of electrons removed 10


 


Table 2.3: The successive ionisation energies of an element X.


 


4


 


Question


3 ionisation energies of boron are shown in Table 2.4.


 


lonisation energy / 3660 25 000 32 800


Table 2.4: Successive ionisation energies of boron.


 
i Why is there a large increase between the third and fourth ionisation energies?


ii Explain how these figures confirm that the electronic structure of boron is 2, 3.
the element aluminium (Z = 13), sketch a graph to predict the of the successive


ionisation energies (y-axis) against the number of electrons removed (x-axis).


We can use successive ionisation energies in this way to:


predict or confirm the simple electronic configuration of elements
confirm the number of electrons in the outer shell of an element and hence the group to which the


element belongs


deduce which group an element belongs to in the Periodic Table.
Question
4 six ionisation energies of an element are 1090, 2350, 4610, 6220, 37 800 and 47 300 kj


Which group in the Periodic Table does this element belong to? Explain your decision.
b a graph to show the logj values of the first four successive ionisation energies of a Group


2 element.


2.3 Sub-shells and atomic orbitals


Quantum sub-shells
The principal quantum shells, apart from the first, are split into sub-shells (sub-levels). Each principal
quantum shell contains a different number of sub-shells. The sub-shells are distinguished by the letters s, p
or d. There are also f sub-shells for elements with more than 57 electrons. Figure 2.7 shows the sub-shells
for the first four principal quantum levels. In any principal quantum shell, the energy of the electrons in the


sub-shells increases in the orders <d.


The first principal quantum level, n = 1, can hold a maximum of 2 electrons in an s sub-shell.
The second principal quantum level, n = 2, can hold a maximum of 8 electrons: 2 electrons in the s


sub-shell and 6 electrons in the p sub-shell.
The third principal quantum level, n = 3, can hold a maximum of 18 electrons: 2 electrons in the s sub-


shell, 6 electrons in the p sub-shell and 10 electrons in the d sub-shell.
You will also notice from Figure 2.7 that the order of the sub-shells in terms of increasing energy does not
follow a regular pattern of s then p then d after the element argon. The order of sub-shells after argon
appears to overlap. The next element after argon is potassium. Potassium’s outer electron is in the 4s, not


in the 3d, sub-shell. The first element with an electron in the 3d sub-shell is element 21, scandium.


 
4d
5s
n=4 4p
3d
4s

5 n=3 3p

3s




=
2p
n=2<
2s
n=1 1s


principal quantum sub-shell


shell
Figure 2.7: The sub-shells for the first four principal quantum shells. The maximum number of electrons that are allowed


in each sub-shell is: s = 2 electrons, p = 6 electrons, d = 10 electrons.


 
When high-speed electrons hit gas particles at low pressure, coloured lines are seen through an instrument
called a spectroscope (see Figure 2.4). The letters s, p and d come from the terms used to describe these


lines: ‘s’ for ‘sharp’, ‘p’ for ‘principal’ and ‘d’ for ‘diffuse’.
Atomic orbitals


Each sub-shell contains one or more atomic orbitals.
An atomic orbital is a region of space around the nucleus of an atom that can be occupied by one or two

electrons.
As each orbital can only hold a maximum of two electrons, the number of orbitals in each sub-shell must
be:



orbital


three orbitals


five orbitals


Shapes of the orbitals
Each orbital has a three-dimensional shape. Within this shape there is a high probability of finding the


electron or electrons in the orbital. Figure 2.8 shows how we represent the s and p orbitals.
An s orbital has a spherical shape. The 2s orbital in the second principal quantum shell has the same shape
as the 1s orbital in the first quantum shell. They are both spherical, but electrons in the 2s orbital have
more energy than electrons in the 1s orbital. There are three 2p orbitals in the second quantum shell. Each
of these has the same shape. The shape is like an hourglass with two ‘lobes’. The three sets of ‘lobes’ are
arranged at right angles to each other along the x, y and z axes. Hence the three 2p orbitals are named
2px, and The three 2p orbitals have the same energy as each other. There are also three 3p


orbitals in the third quantum shell. Their shapes are similar to the shapes of the 2p orbitals but, again, their
energies are higher.


normally drawn as C)


orbitals
    


 


normally drawn as


 


orbitals
Figure 2.8: Representations of orbitals (the position of the nucleus is shown by the black dot). a s orbitals are spherical. b


p orbitals, px, py and pz, have ‘lobes’ along the x, y and z axes.


 


 


Figure 2.9: The shape of a dz? orbital.


 
The d orbitals are more complex in shape and arrangement in space. In 1925 Louis de Broglie suggested
that electrons behaved like waves. This led to the idea of electron probability clouds. The electron
probability cloud for one type of d orbital has two pieces: it is like a modified p orbital with a ring around
the middle (Figure 2.9). You will not need to know the d-orbital shapes at AS Level, but you will for A Level


when studying the transition elements (see Chapter 24).


Filling the shells and orbitals
The most stable electronic configuration of an atom is the one that has the lowest amount of energy. The
order in which the sub-shells are filled depends on their relative energy. The sub-shell with the lowest
energy, the 1s, is therefore filled first, followed by those that are successively higher in energy. As we


noted in Figure 2.7, the order of the sub-shells in terms of increasing energy does not follow a regular
pattern of s then p then d after argon, where the 3p sub-shell is full. Figure 2.10 shows the order of filling


the sub-shells.
n=4
n=3
n=2


 


Figure 2.10: Diagram to show the order in which orbitals are filled up to shell n = 4.


 


Question

Give the three types of orbital present in the third principal quantum shell.
b State the maximum number of electrons that can be found in each sub-shell of the third quantum
shell.


2.4 Electronic configurations
Representing electronic configurations


Here is a detailed way of writing the electronic configuration of an atom of hydrogen, that includes


information about the number of electrons in each sub-shell.


number of


electrons
principal 1
quantum
number


sub-shell
Helium has two electrons. Both electrons can go into the 1s orbital, as this can hold a maximum of two


electrons. So, the electronic structure of helium is 1s?.
Lithium has three electrons. The 1s orbital can only hold a maximum of two electrons so the third
electron must go into the next highest sub-shell, the 2s. So, the electronic structure of lithium is



Electrons are added one by one for successive elements, filling each sub-shell in order of increasing energy.


You can see the electronic configurations of the first 18 elements in Table 2.5.
A question about this type of detailed notation will often be stated like this: ‘Use 1s? notation to give the


electronic configuration ...’ as in Question 6.


Question


6 1s? notation to give the electronic configurations of the atoms with the following atomic numbers:
a 16
b 9


c 20
The electronic configurations of some of the elements after argon are shown in Table 2.6. In this table, part
of the electronic configuration of each element is represented by [Ar]. This ‘noble gas core’ represents the
electronic configuration of argon: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®. This method is a shorthand way of writing electronic
structures of atoms with many electrons. However, in an exam you should be prepared to write out the full


electronic configuration.


You should note the following:


Electronic configuration of potassium
Potassium has the electronic configuration 1s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s. The outer electron goes into the 4s sub-


shell rather than the 3d sub-shell because the 4s is below the 3d in terms of its energy.


Filling the 3d sub-shell
After calcium, a new sub-shell becomes occupied. The next electron goes into a 3d sub-shell rather than a
4p sub-shell. So, scandium has the electronic configuration [Ar] 4s. This is because electrons occupy
the orbitals with the lowest energy: the 3d sub-shell is just above the 4s sub-shell but below the 4p sub-
shell. This begins a pattern of filling the 3d sub-shell ending with zinc. Zinc has the electronic configuration


[Ar] 3d?°


Li
~ N
alu zlo


 


 
|



>


Table 2.5: Electronic configurations for the first 18 elements in the Periodic Table.


 


Chromium and copper
The electronic configurations of chromium and copper do not follow the expected pattern. Chromium has
the electronic configuration [Ar] 4s! (rather than the expected [Ar] 3d‘ Copper has the electronic
configuration [Ar] 3d?° 4s! (rather than the expected [Ar] 3d9 4s2). This is because the 3d°4s! and
electron arrangements are more energetically stable. You will have to learn that these two elements are


exceptions to the pattern.


Gallium to krypton


The electrons then add to the 4p sub-shell because this is the next highest energy level above the 3d.


gallium (Ga) Ar] 4s?


 

 




Table 2.6: Electronic configurations for some of the elements 19 to 36, where [Ar] is the electronic structure of argon 1s2


2s? 2p® 3s2


 


Question
7 1s? notation to give the electronic configurations for the following elements:
vanadium (Z = 23)


b (Z = 29)


(Z = 34)


Orbitals and the Periodic Table
The arrangement of elements in the Periodic Table reflects the electronic structure of the elements. The


Periodic Table can be split into blocks of elements (Figure 2.11).


Elements in Groups 1 and 2 have outer electrons in an s sub-shell. These are therefore together called
the s-block.
s-block p-block


d-block


Figure 2.11: Some of the blocks of elements in the Periodic Table.


 
Elements in Groups 13 to 18 (apart from He) have outer electrons in a p sub-shell. These are therefore


together called the p-block.
Elements that add electrons to the d sub-shells are called the d-block elements. Most of these are


transition elements.


Questions
8 Anelement has the electronic configuration 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d?° 4s? 4p®
i Which block in the Periodic Table does this element belong to?
ii group does it belong to?


Identify this element.
b block in the Periodic Table does the element with the electronic configuration


1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s? belong to?
Which one of these statements about the electrons in the outermost principal quantum shell of

phosphorus (atomic number 15) is true?


There are five p-type electrons and no s-type electrons
There are three p-type electrons and two s-type electrons
are two p-type electrons and two s-type electrons


D


There are five s-type electrons and no p-type electrons


Filling the orbitals
A useful way of representing electronic configurations is a diagram that places electrons in boxes (Figure


2.12).
Each box represents an atomic orbital.


The boxes (orbitals) can be arranged in order of increasing energy from bottom to top.


An electron is represented by an arrow.


 


| |


 


 


 


 


 


Figure 2.12: The electronic configuration of boron in box form.


 


 


 


 


 
The direction of the arrow represents the ‘spin’ of the electron. (We imagine an electron rotating


around its own axis either in a clockwise or anticlockwise direction.)
When there are two electrons in an orbital, the ‘spins’ of the electrons are opposite, so the two arrows


in this box point in opposite directions.
Electrons in the same region of space repel each other because they have the same charge. This is called
spin-pair repulsion. Wherever possible, electrons will occupy separate orbitals in the same sub-shell to
minimise this repulsion, so these electrons have their ‘spin’ in the same direction. Electrons are only paired
when there are no more empty orbitals available within a sub-shell. The spins are then opposite to
minimise repulsion. Figure 2.13 shows the electronic structures of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen to illustrate


these points.


Free radicals
A free radical is a species with one or more unpaired electrons. An example of a free radical is an isolated
chlorine atom, which has the electronic configuration In the 3p orbitals, two of the
orbitals have paired electrons and the remaining orbital has an unpaired electron. The unpaired electron in
a free radical is shown as a dot e.g. Cl-. Groups of atoms can also be free radicals. For example, the


radical has a carbon atom with an unpaired electron.


 

N



carbon nitrogen oxygen


1s? 2p2 1s? 2p3 2s? 2p4


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
Figure 2.13: When adding electrons to a particular sub-shell, the electrons are only paired when no more empty orbitals


are available.


 


IMPORTANT
The word species refers to different particles such as atoms, ions, molecules, free radicals or electrons


when we want to write in general terms or about more than one type of particle.


 


Electronic configuration of ions
Positive ions are formed when electrons are removed from atoms. The sodium ion, Na* (proton number =
11), has 10 electrons so its electronic configuration is 1s* 2s? 2p®. Note that this is the same as the

electronic configuration of neon, the element with 10 electrons in each atom.
Negative ions are formed when atoms gain electrons. The sulfide ion, (proton number = 16), has 18
electrons. Its electronic configuration is 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®, which is the same as argon, the element with
18 electrons in each atom.



Note that, in general, electrons in the outer sub-shell are removed when metal ions form their positive ions.
However, the d-block elements behave slightly differently. Reading across the Periodic Table from
potassium to zinc, the 4s sub-shell fills before the 3d sub-shell. But when atoms of a d-block element lose


electrons to form ions, the 4s electrons are lost first.
For example:
Ti atom: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d? 4s? ion: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 3d?


Cr atom: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d5 4s! > Cr3+ ion: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 3d3


WORKED EXAMPLE
2 Use 1s? notation to deduce the electronic configuration of an ion.


Solution
Step 1: Deduce the number of electrons in an iron atom (= number of protons shown in the


Periodic Table for iron) = 26
Step 2: Deduce the electronic configuration of an iron atom by adding the electrons to the
orbitals in order. Remember to fill the 4s before the 3d.
= 15? 262 452
Step 3: ion, we remove three electrons.
the 2 outer s-electrons are removed first: 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® >


1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®


an outer d-electron is then removed: 1s? 2s* 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d® 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®


 
Question
10 Write electronic configurations for the following ions:

b (Z=8)
(Z = 26)


(Z


e Cut


2.5 Periodic patterns of atomic and ionic radii


IMPORTANT


Stable metal ions are smaller than metal atoms because the atoms have lost their outer shell
electrons, so the attractive forces between the nucleus and outer electrons is larger. Stable non-metal
ions are larger than metal atoms because the atoms have gained electrons to complete their outer


shells, so the attractive forces between the nucleus and outer electrons is smaller.


 


Atomic radius
The atomic radius increases down any group. This is because, going down the group, each successive
element has one more shell of electrons which is further from the nucleus. Although there is also an
increasing nuclear charge going down the group, the increased effect of inner shell electrons shielding the


outer shell electrons is more important.
The atomic radius decreases across any period. This is because the number of protons, and therefore the
nuclear charge, increases by one with each successive element. The number of electrons also increases by
one but the extra electron added goes into the same (outer) energy level. This means that the shielding
does not change significantly. The greater attractive force of the increased nuclear charge on the outer


shell electrons pulls them closer to the nucleus.


lonic radius
The ionic radius increases down any group (for ions with the same charge). In each group the number of
electrons lost or gained by each element in the group is generally the same. For example, Group 2
elements form 2+ ions and atoms of Group 17 elements form ions with a charge of —1. The reason for the
increase in ionic radius is similar to that for the atoms. Going down the group, each successive element has
one more shell of electrons which is further from the nucleus. The increased effect of inner shell electrons


shielding the outer shell electrons is more important than the effect of increased nuclear charge.
Going across a period from Group 1 to Group 14, the ionic radius decreases. This is for similar reasons to
those for decreasing atomic radii across a period. The increasing nuclear charge attracts the electrons in
the outer electron shell closer to the nucleus with increasing atomic number. The shielding is approximately
the same, so has less effect than the increase in nuclear charge. Positively charged ions are smaller than
their original atoms because they have lost their outer shell electrons. The change is generally greater than
that for the atomic radius due to the increase in charge as we go from Groups 1 to 14. Negatively charged
ions in Groups 15 to 18 are larger than their original atoms because each atom will have gained one or
more extra electrons into their outer energy level. From Group 15 to Group 18, the ionic radius decreases.
This is for similar reasons to those for decreasing atomic radii across a period and due to the normal charge


on the ions decreasing.


Question
Explain why the values for the ionic radii for the negative ions in Period 3 are higher than the ionic

radii for the positive ions.
b a graph to show how the ionic radius changes across Period 3.



2.6 Patterns in ionisation energies in the Periodic


Table


Patterns across a period
Figure 2.14 shows how the first ionisation energy, changes across the first two periods. We can explain


the form of the graph mainly by referring to the factors that influence ionisation energies (see Section 2.2).


IMPORTANT


The variation in the values of first ionisation energy is a periodic property because when plotted
against atomic number it shows a repeating pattern. The same goes for the variation of atomic and


ionic radii (see Chapter 10, Section 10.2).


 

u

o
1



 


 


 


First ionisation energy mol-1


Atomic number (Z)


Figure 2.14: A graph of the first ionisation energies of the elements hydrogen to sodium plotted against atomic number.


 
1 There is a general increase in IE, across a period. This applies to Period 1 (hydrogen and helium), Period
2 (lithium to neon) and also to other periods. As you go across a period the nuclear charge increases.
But the electron removed comes from the same shell. The force of attraction between the positive


nucleus and the outer negative electrons increases across the period because:
the nuclear charge increases
the distance between the nucleus and the outer electron remains reasonably constant


the shielding by inner shells remains reasonably constant.
2 There is a rapid decrease in ionisation energy between the last element in one period and the first
element in the next period. The IE, for lithium is much smaller than the IE, for helium. Helium has two
electrons. These are in the first quantum shell. But lithium has three electrons. The third electron must
go into the next quantum shell further away from the nucleus. The force of attraction between the


positive nucleus and the outer negative electrons decreases because:


 


the distance between the nucleus and the outer electron increases


 
the shielding by inner shells increases


these two factors outweigh the increased nuclear charge.
is a slight decrease in IE, between beryllium and boron. Although boron has one more proton than


beryllium, there is a slight decrease in IE, on removal of the outer electron. Beryllium has the electronic
structure 1s? and boron has the electronic structure 1s? 2s? 2p!. The fifth electron in boron must be
in the 2p sub-shell, which is slightly further away from the nucleus than the 2s sub-shell. There is less


attraction between the fifth electron in boron and the nucleus because:


the distance between the nucleus and the outer electron increases slightly
the shielding by inner shells increases slightly


these two factors outweigh the increased nuclear charge.
4 There is a slight decrease in IE, between nitrogen and oxygen. Oxygen has one more proton than
nitrogen and the electron removed is in the same 2p sub-shell. So, you might think that IE; would
increase. However, the spin-pairing of the electrons plays a part here. If you look back at Figure 2.13,
you will see that the electron removed from the nitrogen is from an orbital that contains an unpaired
electron. The electron removed from the oxygen is from the orbital that contains a pair of electrons. The
extra repulsion between the pair of electrons in this orbital results in less energy being needed to


remove an electron. So, IE, for oxygen is lower, because of spin-pair repulsion.
These patterns repeat themselves across the third period. However, the presence of the d-block elements
in Period 4 disrupts the pattern, as d-block elements have first ionisation energies that are relatively similar


and fairly high.


Patterns down a group
The first ionisation energy decreases as you go down a group in the Periodic Table. For example, in Group 1


the values of IE; are:
Li=519 kj





As you go down the group, the outer electron removed is from the same type of orbital but from a
successively higher principal quantum level: 2s for lithium, 3s for sodium and 4s for potassium. Although
the nuclear charge is increasing down the group there is less attraction between the outer electron and the


nucleus because:
the distance between the nucleus and the outer electron increases


the shielding by complete inner shells increases


these two factors outweigh the increased nuclear charge.
Questions
12 a_ ionisation energies of four consecutive elements in the Periodic Table are:
sodium = 494
magnesium = 736
aluminium = 577
silicon = 786
i Explain the general increase in ionisation energies from sodium to silicon.


why aluminium has a lower first ionisation energy than magnesium.
first ionisation energy of fluorine is 1680 whereas the first ionisation energy of iodine
is 1010 Explain why fluorine has a higher first ionisation energy than iodine despite

fluorine having a smaller nuclear charge.
one of the diagrams in Figure 2.15 could be the graph of first ionisation energies for a series of
elements consecutive in atomic number and beginning with an element in Group 15?


Figure 2.15: Four graphs of first ionisation energy against atomic number.


 


REFLECTION


Think what you have learned about the following and write a paragraph to explain the trends:


variation of atomic or ionic radius across a period and down a group


variation of first ionisation energy across a period and down a group


variation of successive ionisation energies of an element in Period 3 of the Periodic Table.
Share your ideas with the class or another learner. If you were the teacher, what comments would


you make about your paragraph?


 


SUMMARY
Electron shells can be divided into s, p and d sub-shells which can hold a maximum of 2, 6 and 10 electrons


respectively, and each sub-shell has a specific number of orbitals which can each hold a maximum of two electrons.
The first ionisation energy of an element is the energy needed to remove one electron from each atom in one mole

of atoms of the element in the gaseous state (to form gaseous 1+ ions).
The magnitude (how big the value is) of the ionisation energy depends on four things:

the distance of the electron from the nucleus

the number of positive charges in the nucleus


the degree of shielding of outer electrons by inner electron shells


spin-pair repulsion.
The electronic configuration of the outer shell electrons and the position of an element in the Periodic Table can be

deduced using successive ionisation energy data.



 


1


2


 


The sketch graph shows the 13 successive ionisation energies of aluminium.


ionisation energy
67 8
Number of electrons removed


the term first ionisation energy.
Explain how the graph provides evidence for the existence of three electron shells in an


aluminium atom.
Write an equation, including state symbols, to represent the 2nd ionisation energy of


aluminium.


the electronic configuration of an aluminium ion, using 1s? notation.


[3]


[6]
[2]


[1]


[Total: 12]
The table shows the first ionisation energies, in of the elements in Period


3 of the Periodic Table.


 
Explain why there is a general increase in the value of IE, across the period.
Explain why aluminium has a lower value of IE, than magnesium.
the electronic configuration for argon (Z = 18) using 1s? notation.
and complete the diagram below for the 15 electrons in phosphorus by:


i adding labels for the other sub-shells


ii how the electrons are arranged.


 


 


 


1s


 


Predict a value for the first ionisation energy for potassium, which has one more proton


than argon.
[4]
[4]


[1]
[1]


[3]


[1]


[Total: 14]
the meaning of the term atomic orbital.
diagrams to show the shape of:
i an s orbital
ap orbital.
Element X has the electronic configuration 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p®
i State which block in the Periodic Table element X belongs to.
ii the maximum number of electrons in a d sub-shell.
X forms an ion of type


i Write the full electronic configuration for this ion using 1s? notation.
ii Write the symbol for the sub-shell that begins to fill after the 3d and 4s are


completely full.


[1]
[1]


[1]
[1]


[1]


[1]


[1]


[Total: 7]
The first ionisation energies of several elements with consecutive atomic numbers are


shown in the graph.


The letters are not the symbols of the elements.


 





1600


1200


1800


400


First ionisation energy / kJ


 
J


Element
which of the elements A to | belong to Group 1 in the Periodic Table. Explain


your answer.
b which of the elements A to | could have the electronic configuration 2s? 2p®



the rise in first ionisation energy between element E and element G.


Estimate the 1st ionisation energy of element J.


successive ionisation energies of element A are shown in the next sketch graph.

[3]
[1]
[4]
[2]


The


ionisation energy



0 12 3 4 5 8 9


Number of electrons removed


 
Explain what information this graph gives about how the electrons are arranged in shells


for element A. [3]
[Total: 13]
Define the following:
ionisation energy [3]
ii 3rd ionisation energy. [3]
Give the equations representing:
the 1st ionisation energy of magnesium [2]
ii the 3rd ionisation energy of magnesium. [2]
State which ionisation energies are represented by the equations below.


Mg**(g) +
+ [1]


[Total: 12]


graph shows a sketch of (ionisation energy) against number of electrons


removed for magnesium.


Use


ionisation energy


this graph to answer the following questions.


A


 


 
01234567 8 9 101112
Number of electrons removed


Explain why the first two electrons are relatively easy to remove. [3]


Explain why there is a sharp rise in ionisation energy when the third electron is removed. [3]
Explain what information the graph gives about the electron arrangement of


magnesium. [3]
Construct the equation for the ionisation energy marked X (the 5th ionisation energy). [2]


[Total: 11]
The table shows the first five ionisation energies for five elements (A to E). For


each one, state which group the element belongs to. [5]


 


Explain your reasoning behind your answer for element E. [1]
Sketch a graph to show how (ionisation energy) for phosphorus (atomic number
15) varies when plotted against number of electrons removed. [6]

[Total: 12]
Define the term first ionisation energy. [3]


Sketch a graph to show how (ionisation energy) for chlorine (atomic number 17)
varies when plotted against number of electrons removed. [6]

Explain the shape of the graph you have drawn. [6]
[Total: 15]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
understand that electrons in an atom can exist only in certain
2A,


energy levels (shells) outside the nucleus
understand that main energy levels (shells) are given principal
quantum numbers n = 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.; the lowest energy level


(n = 1) is closest to the nucleus
understand that shells may be divided into sub-shells known
as s, p and d sub-shells, which can hold a maximum of 2, 6


and 10 electrons, respectively
understand that the region of space in which an electron is
likely to be found is called an orbital: each sub-shell has a
number of orbitals which can each hold a maximum of two
electrons; sub-shells s, p and d have 1, 3 and 5 orbitals,


respectively
understand that s orbitals are spherical in shape and p orbitals

have two ‘lobes’


understand that when two electrons are present in an orbital
23
they spin in opposite directions and are said to be paired
deduce the electronic configuration of atoms by adding
electrons to each orbital starting from those in the lowest 2.4
energy level
understand that when electrons are added to orbitals in the
same sub-shell they go into separate orbitals if possible; 2.4


electrons pair up where this is not possible
understand that a free radical is a species with one or more 24


unpaired electrons
understand that the first ionisation energy of an element is the
energy needed to remove one electron from each atom in one 22
mole of atoms of the element in the gaseous state (to form


gaseous 1+ ions)
understand that the magnitude of the ionisation energy
depends on four factors:
the distance of the electron from the nucleus
the number of positive charges in the nucleus
the degree of shielding of outer electrons by inner shells
and sub-shells
spin-pair repulsion


a period and down a group using the four factors above
explain trends in atomic and ionic radius of the elements
across a period and down a group using the four factors listed | 2.5
above
understand that the ionisation energies needed to remove the
first, second, third, fourth, etc. electrons from each atom or 22
ion in a mole of gaseous atoms are called successive
ionisation energies
deduce electronic configuration and the position of an element
in the Periodic Table (which group the element belongs to)


using successive ionisation energy data.


 


images


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START
Compound ions have more than one type of atom in them, e.g. a sulfate ion. Write down the names
and give the formulae of as many compound ions as you can. Compare your answers with the rest


of the class.
Take turns in challenging another learner to write down the formula of a simple compound by
balancing the charges on the positive and negative ions. Check your answers afterwards using a


textbook or the internet.
What is meant by the term diatomic? Make a list of diatomic molecules. When you think your list is
complete, compare it with the list made by others in the class. Were there any molecules that you


forgot about?
What do you understand by the chemical terms anhydrous, hydrated and water of


crystallisation?
Take turns to challenge a partner to balance simple equations. Your partner looks in a textbook for
an equation, then writes the equation down without the large numbers in front of each element or
compound. You then try to balance the equation. How well did you do? Take turns in doing this until


you are sure that you can balance simple equations.
Explain to another learner how you change the units dm? into cm? and cm? into dm3? Does the


other learner agree with you?
Make a list of other units that you know about. What do the units refer to (e.g. pressure,


temperature)?
Work with another learner to write down the meaning of each of the chemical terms mole, relative
atomic mass, concentration, molar gas volume, standard temperature and pressure. Compare your


definitions with those in a textbook.
Explain to another learner how to change the form of an equation of type z = to make y or x the



mass
subject. Use the expression moles = as an example.


relative atomic mass
Work with another learner to make a list of other examples of equations of type z =



What is the meaning of the terms standard form and significant figures when applied to numbers?


If you are not sure, ask another learner, or a teacher, or look on the internet.
Take turns in challenging a partner to convert figures into standard form. Your partner thinks of a
number from 0.0001 to 100 000, e.g. 0.025 or 37 500, and asks you to change this into standard


form. Take turns to do this until you are sure that you understand the use of standard form.


GETTING OUT THE GOLD!


 


For thousands of years, people have heated rocks to extract materials. The remains of charcoal kilns
for extracting metals dating back thousands of years have been found in Africa. Recently, chemists


have learnt more about how to get materials from the rocks, from the sea, and from plants.
A lot of gold is present as microscopic particles in the rocks. The gold is obtained by crushing and
grinding the rocks from mines that are open to the air (Figure 3.1). Scientists use a method called froth
flotation to produce a ‘sulfide concentrate’ which contains gold, CuFeSz and (sand). This is
heated strongly in a furnace, then treated with a solution of sodium cyanide. This makes the gold into
soluble gold cyanide which is then reacted with zinc to form gold. The impurities remain in solution. A
problem with this method is that the need for strong heating makes it difficult to extract the gold using


sodium cyanide.


 


Figure 3.1: An open-cast gold mine.


 
Recently, scientists have used bacteria to extract the gold. Strong heating is not needed. The bacteria
are mixed with the ‘sulfide concentrate’ and water which contains dissolved oxygen. The bacteria
catalyse the oxidation of the sulfides and also help to make the products of this oxidation water-
soluble. After oxidation, the pH of the mixture is first adjusted by adding just the right amount of lime,


and then treated with sodium cyanide.


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Look at Figure 3.1. What are the problems with mines which are open to the air, in terms of health,


pollution and other factors?
e Why is heating the sulfide concentrate in the open air bad for the environment? How can you


reduce these harmful effects?


e Suggest why, when extracting materials, it is important to mix the materials in the right amounts?
e What are the advantages and disadvantages of using bacteria to extract gold compared with the

old method?



3.1 Masses of atoms and molecules


Unified atomic mass unit
Atoms of different elements have different masses. When we perform chemical calculations, we need to
know how heavy one atom is compared with another. The mass of a single atom is so small that it is
impossible to weigh it directly. To overcome this problem, we have to weigh a lot of atoms. We then
compare this mass with the mass of the same number of ‘standard’ atoms. We define atomic mass in
terms of a ‘standard’ atom. We call this standard the unified atomic mass unit. Scientists have defined


unified atomic mass in terms of the isotope of carbon-12.
The formal definition of a unified atomic mass unit is: one twelfth of an unbound neutral atom of the
carbon-12 isotope in its ground state. (Unbound means an isolated carbon atom and the ground state is
the lowest energy state.) The simplified definition, which you can use for exams, is: one twelfth of the mass
of a carbon-12 atom. The symbol for the unit of unified atomic mass is u. You will also see the symbol Da


used (abbreviation for Dalton).


1 unified atomic mass unit = 1 u = 1.66 x 10727 kg


Relative atomic mass, A;
The relative atomic mass is the ratio of the average mass of the atoms of an element to the unified atomic
mass unit. The values of the relative atomic mass in the Periodic Table are determined by using the
weighted average mass of the atoms of a particular element. This is because most elements are mixtures
of isotopes. The definition specifies a particular sample because the proportion of different isotopes can
vary slightly according to the location where the element has been extracted. But this difference is usually


so small that for practical purposes we can use the values given in the Periodic Table.


weighted average mass of atoms in a given sample of an element


 


 



unified atomic mass unit


Note that relative atomic mass has no units because it is a ratio and the units cancel.
The exact A, of hydrogen is 1.0079. This is very close to 1 and most Periodic Tables give the A, of hydrogen
as 1.0. However, some elements in the Periodic Table have values that are not whole numbers. For


example, the A, for chlorine is 35.5. This is because chlorine has two main isotopes. In a sample of chlorine,
chlorine-35 makes up about three-quarters of the chlorine atoms and chlorine-37 makes up about a


quarter.


Relative isotopic mass
Isotopes are atoms that have the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons (see Section
1.3). We represent the mass number (the total number of neutrons plus protons in an atom) by a number
written at the top left-hand corner of the atom’s symbol, e.g. 2°Ne, or by a number written after the atom’s


name or symbol, e.g. neon-20 or Ne-20.
We use the term relative isotopic mass for the mass of a particular isotope of an element which has the
Avogadro number of atoms (6.02 x 1023). For example, the relative isotopic mass of carbon-13 is exactly


Masses of compounds
We find the relative molecular mass (M,) by adding up the relative atomic masses of all the atoms


present in one molecule.
For example, for methane:


formula:


atoms present:
add A, values: (1 x A,[C]) + (4 x A,[H]) = M, of methane
12.0) + (4 x 1.0) = 16.0


When calculating relative molecular masses, we use the simplest formula for the compound. For silicon
dioxide, which has a giant covalent structure of silicon and oxygen atoms joined together, the simplest


formula is We say that SiO, is the formula unit of silicon dioxide.
Relative molecular mass,
The relative molecular mass, M, is the ratio of the weighted average mass of a molecule of a molecular


compound to the unified atomic mass unit. The relative molecular mass has no units.


weighted average mass of molecules in a given sample of a molecular compound



unified atomic mass unit


Relative formula mass
For compounds containing ions we use the term relative formula mass. This is calculated in the same

way as for relative molecular mass. It is also given the same symbol, M,. For example, for magnesium
hydroxide:

ions present: 1 x 2 x
add A, values: (1 x A,[Mg]) + (2 x (A,[O] + A,[H]))
M, of magnesium hydroxide: = (1 x 24.3) + (2 x (16.0 + 1.0)) = 58.3


3.2 Hydrated and anhydrous compounds
Some compounds can form crystals which have water as part of their structure. This water is called the


water of crystallisation.
Acompound containing water of crystallisation is called a hydrated compound, e.g. hydrated


sulfate,
Acompound which does not contain water of crystallisation is called an anhydrous compound e.g.


anhydrous sulfate,
There can be different degrees of hydration of a compound, e.g. chloride-6-water


and chloride-2-water
When writing chemical formulae for hydrated compounds, we show water of crystallisation separated
from the main formula by a dot. Note that the number of moles of water of crystallisation is usually a


whole number.
Anhydrous compounds can be converted to hydrated compounds by adding water:
e.g. + 5H20 >


The reaction can be reversed by heating:


e.g. > CuSO, +


IMPORTANT
To calculate the relative molecular mass, M,, of a hydrated salt such as you first calculate


the M, of CuSO, and separately, then add these together.


 
Note that in some textbooks you will see the formulae for hydrated salts written with the dot at the bottom


e.g.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 3.1


Can you reverse the reaction?
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher, after they have explained safety


aspects.
one spatulaful of hydrated sulfate into a boiling tube.
2 the tube strongly. Record your observations.


3 the tube cool for a few minutes.


Add a few drops of water to the tube. Record your observations.


Explain your observations using the terms anhydrous, hydrated and water of crystallisation.

 


Question
the Periodic Table in Appendix 1 to calculate the relative formula masses of the following:
chloride,
b sulfate,


ammonium sulfate,

nitrate-6-water,
Tip: for part d you need to calculate the mass of water separately and then add it to the M, of


3.3 Accurate relative atomic masses


Mass spectrometry
A mass spectrometer (Figure 3.2) can be used to measure the mass of each isotope present in an element.
It also compares how much of each isotope is present: the relative abundance (relative isotopic
abundance). A simplified diagram of a mass spectrometer is shown in Figure 3.3. You will not be expected
to know the details of how a mass spectrometer works, but it is useful to understand how the results are


obtained.


 


Figure 3.2: A mass spectrometer is a large and complex instrument.


 


vaporised sample
positively charged


electrodes accelerate positive ions
  
 
     
 


 


magnetic field


heated
filament ionisation


ton


 


 
produces chamber flight
detector
electrons
recorder



computer


 


 


 


Figure 3.3: Simplified diagram of a mass spectrometer.


 
The atoms of the element in the vaporised sample are converted into ions. The stream of ions travels to a
detector after being deflected by a strong magnetic field. As the magnetic field is increased, the ions of
heavier and heavier isotopes move towards the detector. The detector is connected to a computer, which


displays the mass spectrum.
The mass spectrum produced shows the relative abundance (isotopic abundance) on the vertical axis and
the mass to ion charge ratio (m/e) on the horizontal axis. Figure 3.4 shows a typical mass spectrum for a


sample of lead. Table 3.1 shows how the data is interpreted.




L
Relative abundance (%)



 


 
+ T 1


204 205 206 207 208 209


Mass/charge (m/e) ratio


Figure 3.4: The mass spectrum of a sample of lead.


 
For singly positively charged ions, the (m/e) values give the nucleon number of the isotopes detected. In
the case of lead, Table 3.1 shows that 52% of the lead is the isotope with an isotopic mass of 208. The rest


is lead-204 (2%), lead-206 (24%) and lead-207 (22%).


 


Table 3.1: The data from Figure 3.4.


 


Determination of from mass spectra


IMPORTANT


 

You do not need to know the exact working of the mass spectrometer.
We can use the data obtained from a mass spectrometer to calculate the relative atomic mass of an

element very accurately. To calculate the relative atomic mass, we follow this method:

multiply each isotopic mass by its percentage abundance


add the figures together

e divide by 100.
We can use this method to calculate the relative atomic mass of neon from its mass spectrum, shown in
Figure 3.5.


 


 
100- 3

80

&

c

404


=


T + 1
19 20 21 22 23


Mass/charge (m/e) ratio


Figure 3.5: The mass spectrum of neon, Ne.


 


The mass spectrum of neon has three peaks: (90.9%), (0.3%) and (8.8%).
20 x 90.9 21.0 x 0.3 22 x 8.8


)+( )


Note that this answer is given to 3 significant figures, which is consistent with the data given.


 
A high-resolution mass spectrometer can give very accurate relative isotopic masses. For example, =
15.995 and 32S = 31.972. Because of this high level of precision, chemists can distinguish between


molecules such as SO, and which appear to have the same relative molecular mass.


Question
2 at the mass spectrum of germanium, Ge.


Write isotopic formula for the heaviest isotope of germanium.


b the % abundance of each isotope to calculate the relative atomic mass of germanium.


Identification of an organic compound using mass spectrometry
The main use of mass spectrometry is in the identification of organic compounds. As in other forms of
spectroscopy, a substance can be identified by matching its spectrum against the spectra of known


substances stored in a database. This technique is known as ‘fingerprinting’.
The high energy electrons knock electrons from the molecules and break covalent bonds, fragmenting the


molecule. Figure 3.6 shows the mass spectrum produced by propanone, CH3COCH3.
100
80
60


40


Relative abundance (%)
20 2


|


 
0 20 40 60 80 100


Mass/charge ratio (m/e)


Figure 3.6: The mass spectrum of propanone, CH3COCH3.


 




36.7
w



27.4


1


1
Relative abundance (%)
=



i

 





4






|

i


|

4

4


7


J


Mass/charge (m/e) ratio


Figure 3.7: The mass spectrum of germanium, Ge.


 


IMPORTANT
A molecular ion, M*, is formed when one electron is removed from a molecule to form an ion with a


single positive charge e.g. CH, CH,* + e~. Remember that no atoms are removed.


 
The peak at the highest mass-to-charge ratio is caused by the molecular ion (Mt). This ion is formed by
the sample molecule with one electron knocked out. It gives us the relative molecular mass of the sample.
We can assume the ions detected carry a single positive charge, so the reading on the horizontal axis gives


us the mass. In the case of propanone, CH3COCH3, the molecular ion has a relative mass of 58.0. This


corresponds to with a mass of (3 x 12.0) + (1 x 16.0) + (6 x 1.0).
We also get large peaks at 15 and 43 on the mass spectrum. These peaks are due to fragments that are
produced when propanone molecules are broken apart by the electron bombardment. Knowing the


structure of propanone, we should be able to identify the fragment responsible for each peak (Figure 3.8).


H O
|


+ ,C—C—H +e
H O | |
H H

H—C—C—C—H ~ bombarding
| | electrons H
H H | I |




| |


H H


 


Figure 3.8: The fragmentation of propanone: *CH3 causes the peak at 15 and causes the peak at 43.


 


IMPORTANT


Remember that fragmentation (breaking apart) of a compound in a mass spectrometer causes certain
bonds to break. You can deduce what the fragment is by adding up the atomic masses of carbon,
hydrogen and / or other atoms. So a fragment of m/e 15 is C + 3H = 12 + (3 x 1) which is tCH3 anda


fragment of m/e 43 could be *C3H7 or


 
The electron bombardment has caused the C-C single bonds in the propanone molecules to break. This has
resulted in the fragments at m/e 15 and 43 that are observed in Figure 3.6. The breaking of single bonds,


such as C-C, C—O or C-N, is the most common cause of fragmentation.


 

These fragments are very common in mass spectra of organic compounds.



or


28


   


Table 3.2: Common fragments in the mass spectra of organic compounds.


 


 


Question
3 at Figure 3.10, which shows the mass spectrum of ethanol, A structural isomer of


ethanol is methoxymethane, an ether with the formula CH30CH3.
the mass-to-charge ratio of a fragment that would appear on the mass spectrum of


methoxymethane but does not appear on ethanol’s mass spectrum.


Give the formula of the ion responsible for the peak in your answer to part a.

at the mass spectrum of ethanoic acid:
g 43
804 45

c



605 15


404 60





204



60 80


Mass/charge ratio (m/e)


Figure 3.9: Mass spectrum of ethanoic acid.


 


Identify the fragments with mass-to-charge ratios of:
i 15




60.


High-resolution mass spectra
High-resolution mass spectrometers can distinguish between ions that appear to have the same mass ona
low-resolution mass spectrum. Table 3.3 shows the accurate relative isotopic masses of the most common


atoms found in organic molecules.


12.000 000 0
14.003 073 8


186 15.994 9141


Table 3.3: Accurate masses of isotopes.


 


 
These accurate isotopic masses allow us to measure the mass of the molecular ion so accurately that it can


only correspond to one possible molecular formula. For example, a molecular ion peak at 45 could be
caused by or CH3NO. However, a high-resolution mass spectrum would show the peak at
45.057846 and the CH3NO* peak at 45.021462. We can, therefore, be sure which molecule is being


analysed.


Using the [M + 1] peak
There will always be a very small peak just beyond the molecular ion peak at a mass of [M + 1]. This is
caused by molecules in which one of the carbon atoms is the isotope. This is shown in the mass


spectrum of ethanol in Figure 3.10.

100

80
3 60
3 40
[C,HsOH]*
20 i (


3 M+1


 
10 20 30 40 50


Mass-to-charge ratio, m/e


Figure 3.10: The mass spectrum of ethanol, showing the [M + 1] peak.


 
In any organic compound there will be 1.10% carbon-13. We can use this fact to work out the number of


carbon atoms (n) in a molecule. We apply the equation:
100 abundance of ion


1.1 abundance of M+ ion


WORKED EXAMPLE
An unknown compound has a molecular ion peak, with a relative abundance of 54.5% and has
an [M + 1]* peak with a relative abundance of 3.6%. How many carbon atoms does the unknown


compound contain?


Solution


Substituting the values of relative abundance into the equation:


of ion
abundance of M+ ion
we get:
=


54.5


There are 6 carbon atoms in each molecule.


 


Question
has a molecular ion peak at a mass-to-charge ratio of 84 (relative abundance of 62.0%)


and an [M + 1] peak with a relative abundance of 4.1%.


How many carbon atoms are in the hydrocarbon?

Using [M + 2] and [M + 4] peaks




We can tell whether there is chlorine or bromine in an organic compound by comparing the relative
heights of the M and [M + 2] peaks. If the peak heights are equal, there is one atom of bromine per
molecule. If the peak heights are in the ratio 3 [M] to 1 [M + 2], there is one atom of chlorine per


molecule.


 
If the sample compound contains chlorine or bromine atoms, we also get peaks beyond the molecular ion
peak because of isotopes of chlorine and bromine. Chlorine has two isotopes, and as does
bromine, and Table 3.4 shows the approximate percentage of each isotope in naturally occurring


samples.


 


Table 3.4: Naturally occurring isotopes of chlorine and bromine.


 


One Cl or Br atom per molecule
Imagine a sample of chloromethane, We will have molecules of (75%) and molecules of
(25%). The molecular ion will be and two units beyond that on the mass spectrum will be
the peak for The peak for will be one-third the height of the molecular ion. This is the


[M + 2] peak.
In the mass spectrum of bromomethane, CH3Br, we will have two molecular ion peaks of approximately the


same height: one for and the other for (the [M + 2] peak).


You should look out for the relative heights mentioned here when interpreting mass spectra.
[M + 2] peak is one-third the height of the M peak, this suggests the presence of one chlorine


atom per molecule.
If the [M + 2] peak is the same as the height of the M peak, this suggests the presence of one bromine


atom per molecule.


An example of the [M + 2] peak is shown on the mass spectrum of chlorobenzene (Figure 3.11).


Two Cl or Br atoms per molecule
The situation is a little more complex with two chlorine atoms in a molecule, as there are three possibilities.

Considering dichloromethane, we have:


the M peak
the [M + 2] peak
the [M + 2] peak


the [M + 4] peak
The relative heights of the peaks must take into account the natural abundances: it works out as9:6:1


for molecules with two Cl atoms.


   

 

112
100








8 604
c


114



30 50 70 90 110


Mass/charge ratio, m/e
Figure 3.11: The mass spectrum of chlorobenzene, showing the [M + 2] peak. (Note that there are also tiny [M + 1] and


[M + 3] peaks corresponding to in the molecule.)


 
The M, [M + 2] and [M + 4] peaks also occur in dibromomethane but the relative heights of peaks are


easier to work out. Because the ratio 1:1, the M: [M + 2]:[M + 4] height ratio is


Question


Note: Question 5 contains extension content as [M + 4] peaks are not included in the syllabus.
5 List the ions responsible for the M, [M + 2] and [M + 4] peaks in a mass spectrum of


dibromomethane.
b would be the mass-to-charge ratio and relative abundances of the major peaks with the

highest charge-to-mass ratios in the mass spectrum of chloroethane?
many peaks would you see beyond the molecular ion peak in 1,1-dibromoethane? What
would be their mass-to-charge ratios and abundances relative to the molecular ion? (Ignore peaks
due to


3.4 Amount of substance


The mole and the Avogadro constant
The formula of a compound shows us the number of atoms of each element present in one formula unit or
one molecule of the compound. We know that two atoms of hydrogen (A, = 1.0) combine with one atom of
oxygen (A, = 16.0) in water, so the ratio of mass of hydrogen atoms to oxygen atoms in a water molecule
is 2 : 16. No matter how many molecules of water we have, this ratio will always be the same. But the
mass of even 1000 atoms is far too small to be weighed. We have to scale up much more than this to get


an amount of substance that is easy to weigh.
The number of particles equivalent to the relative atomic mass or relative molecular mass of a substance
in grams is called the Avogadro constant (or Avogadro number). The symbol for the Avogadro constant is L
(the symbol Na may also be used).The numerical value of the Avogadro constant is 6.02 x The mass
of substance with this number of particles is called a mole. The Avogadro constant is chosen so that the
mass of one mole in grams equals the average mass of an atom of an element in unified atomic mass
units. So a mole of sodium (A, = 23.0) contains 6.02 x 1023 atoms and has a mass of 23.0 g. The


abbreviation for a mole is mol.
We can define the mole in terms of the Avogadro constant: A mole is the amount of substance which


contains 6.02 x specified particles. The particles can be atoms, molecules, ions or electrons.


IMPORTANT


In many books you will see an alternative definition of the mole based on the carbon-12 isotope: one
mole of a substance is the amount of that substance that has the same number of specific particles
(atoms, molecules or ions) as there are atoms in exactly 12 g of the carbon-12 isotope. This definition


is now out of date.


 
The Avogadro constant applies to atoms, molecules, ions and electrons. So in 1 mole of sodium there are
6.02 x 1023 sodium atoms and in 1 mole of sodium chloride (NaCl) there are 6.02 x 1023 sodium ions and


6.02 x chloride ions.
It is important to make clear what type of particles we are referring to. If we just state ‘moles of chlorine’, it
is not clear whether we are thinking about chlorine atoms or chlorine molecules. A mole of chlorine
molecules, contains 6.02 x chlorine molecules but twice as many chlorine atoms, as there are two


chlorine atoms in every chlorine molecule.


IMPORTANT
Molar mass is a general term used for the mass in grams of 1 mole of a compound, whether ionic,


simple molecules or giant covalent structures. ‘Relative molecular mass’ refers only to molecules.


 


 
Figure 3.12: Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856) was an Italian scientist, who first deduced that equal volumes of gases
contain equal numbers of molecules. Although the Avogadro constant is named after him, it was left to other scientists to


calculate the number of particles in a mole.


 
We often refer to the mass of a mole of substance as its molar mass (abbreviation M). The units of molar


mass are g


Moles and mass
The Systéme International (SI) base unit for mass is the kilogram. But this is a rather large mass to use for
general laboratory work in chemistry, so chemists prefer to use the relative molecular mass or formula
mass in grams (1000 g = 1 kg). You can find the number of moles of a substance by using the mass of


substance and mass of one mole of that substance (the molar mass)
mass of substance in grams


number of moles (mol) = (e)


 


molar mass (g
IMPORTANT


Some students find it helpful to use a triangle such as that shown to work out mass from molar mass
and number of moles. By covering the quantity you want to find, you will see the correct form of the


equation to use.


Figure 3.13: Triangle diagram for mole calculations.


 
However, it is far better to learn how to cross multiply because such triangles will not work with more


complex equations: ask another learner or a teacher to help you.


WORKED EXAMPLES

 
2 How many moles of sodium chloride are present in 117.0 g of sodium chloride, NaCl?



(A, values: Na = 23.0, Cl = 35.5)


Solution
Step 1: molar mass of NaCl = 23.0 + 35.5


Step 2: mass _


number of moles =



= 2.0 mol
3 What mass of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, is present in 0.25 mol of sodium hydroxide?


(A, values: H = 1.0, Na = 23.0, O = 16.0)


Solution
Step 1: molar mass of NaOH = 23.0 + 16.0


= 40.0 g
Step 2: mass = number of moles x molar mass


x 40.0 g = 10.0 g NaOH


IMPORTANT
When dealing with moles, it is important to be clear about the type of particle referred to. For example:
32.0 grams of oxygen contains 1 mole of oxygen molecules but 2 moles of oxygen atoms and 1


mole of contains 1 mol of Mg2* ions but 2 moles of ions.


 


Question
6 a_ values (Fe = 55.8, N= 14.0, O = 16.0, S = 32.1) to calculate the amount of


substance in moles in each of the following:
i 10.7 g of sulfur atoms


ii 64.2 g of sulfur molecules (Sg)


60.45 g of anhydrous nitrate, Fe(NO3)3
the value of the Avogadro constant (6.02 x to calculate the total number of


atoms in 7.10 g of chlorine atoms. (A, value: Cl = 35.5)


To find the mass of a substance present in a given number of moles, you need to rearrange the equation


mass of substance in grams (g)


 
number of moles (mol) = 7


molar mass (g


mass of substance (g) = number of moles (mol) x molar mass (g


Figure 3.14 shows what the molar mass of six elements looks like.


 
Figure 3.14: One mole quantities of common elements. The cylinders from left to right hold mercury, lead and copper.


Sulfur is in the left flask, magnesium in the right and chromium on the watch-glass.


 


Question
7 these A, values: C = 12.0, Fe = 55.8, H = 1.0, O = 16.0, Na = 23.0.
Calculate the mass of the following:
moles of carbon dioxide, CO,

b moles of sodium carbonate,
c 5.00 moles of hydroxide,


3.5 Mole calculations


Reacting masses
When reacting chemicals together, we may need to know what mass of each reactant to use so that they
react exactly and there is no waste (Figure 3.15). To calculate this, we need to know the chemical equation.
This shows us the ratio of moles of the reactants and products: the stoichiometry of the equation. The


balanced equation shows this stoichiometry. For example, in the reaction


+ 3CO 2Fe +
1 mole of oxide reacts with 3 moles of carbon monoxide to form 2 moles of iron and 3 moles of
carbon dioxide. The stoichiometry of the equation is 1 : 2 : 3. The large numbers that are included in the


equation (3, 2 and 3) are called stoichiometric numbers.
In order to find the mass of products formed in a chemical reaction we use:


the mass of the reactants
the molar mass of the reactants


the balanced equation.


 
Figure 3.15: lron reacting with sulfur to produce iron sulfide. We can calculate exactly how much iron is needed to react
with sulfur and the mass of the products formed by knowing the molar mass of each reactant and the balanced chemical


equation.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
4 Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide.


2Mg + 2MgO
Calculate the mass of oxygen needed to react with 1 mole of magnesium. What is the mass of the


magnesium oxide formed?.


Solution
Step 1: Write the balanced equation.


2Mg + 2MgO


Step 2: Multiply each formula mass in g by the relevant stoichiometric number in the equation.



48.69
From this calculation we can deduce that:


32.0 g of oxygen are needed to react exactly with


48.6 g of magnesium


80.6 g of magnesium oxide are formed.
If we burn 12.15 g of magnesium (0.5 mol) we get 20.15 g of magnesium oxide. This is because the
stoichiometry of the reaction shows us that for each mole (or part of mole) of magnesium burnt, we
get the same number of moles of magnesium oxide. This means that for every 0.5 mole burnt, we


get 0.5 mole of product.


 
In this type of calculation we do not always need to know the molar mass of each of the reactants. If one or
more of the reactants is in excess, we need only know the mass in grams and the molar mass of the


reactant that is not in excess.
The reactant which has the number of moles in excess is called the excess reagent.


e The reactant which is not in excess is called the limiting reagent.


IMPORTANT


Remember that in calculating which reactant is limiting, you must:
work out the number of moles of the reactant


take into account the ratio of the reactants shown in the equation (the stoichiometry).


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
5 Asample of 79.8 g of oxide is mixed with 9.36 g of carbon and heated. A reaction occurs.
+ 3C > 4Fe +
Show by calculation that oxide is the limiting reactant.


(A, values: Fe = 55.8, O = 16.0, C = 12.0)


Solution
Step 1: Calculate the moles of each reagent.



moles of Fe,03 = = 0.50 mol


x 55.8) + (3 x 16.0)
moles of C = 0.78 mol
12
Step 2: Refer to the stoichiometry of the equation:
For every 2 which react, 3 C are needed
So for 0.5 mol we need 0.5 x mol C
Step 3: Determine which is in excess.


number of moles C required = 0.75 number of moles C from step 1 = 0.78


So C is in excess by 0.78 — 0.75 = 0.03 mol and oxide is limiting.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
oxide reacts with carbon monoxide to form iron and carbon dioxide.


Fe,03 + 3CO > 2Fe +
Calculate the maximum mass of iron produced when 798 g of oxide is reduced by excess


carbon monoxide. (A, values: Fe = 55.8, O = 16.0)

Solution
Step 1: Write the balanced equation.


Fe,03 + 3CO > 2Fe +
Step 2: Calculate molar masses taking into account the number of moles in the equation.
1 mole oxide iron


(2 x 16.0) >


159.6 g +


Step 3: Calculate mass of Fe in 798 g Fe,03 111.6



i506 7°
You can see that in step 3, we have simply used ratios to calculate the amount of iron produced from


798 g of oxide.


 


Question
8 Sodium reacts with excess oxygen to form sodium peroxide,


2Na + >
Calculate the maximum mass of sodium peroxide formed when 4.60 g of sodium is burnt in


excess oxygen. (A, values: Na = 23.0, O = 16.0)
oxide is reduced to tin by carbon. Carbon monoxide is also formed.



Calculate the mass of carbon that exactly reacts with 14.0 g of tin(IV) oxide. Give your answer to


3 significant figures. (A, values: C = 12.0, O = 16.0, Sn = 118.7)


The stoichiometry of a reaction
We can find the stoichiometry of a reaction if we know the amounts of each reactant that exactly react


together and the amounts of each product formed.
For example, if we react 4.0 g of hydrogen with 32.0 g of oxygen we get 36.0 g of water. (A, values: H =


1.0, O = 16.0)


hydrogen (H,) + oxygen(O,) — water (H,O)


 


 
4.0 32.0
2x1.0 2x16.0 (2x1.0)+16.0


=2 mol =1 mol =2 mol
This ratio is the ratio of stoichiometric numbers in the equation. So the equation is:


+
We can still deduce the stoichiometry of this reaction even if we do not know the mass of oxygen that
reacted. The ratio of hydrogen to water is 1 : 1. But there is only one atom of oxygen in a molecule of
water: half the amount in an oxygen molecule. So the mole ratio of oxygen to water in the equation must


Question
9 56.2 9 Si, reacts exactly with 284.0 g of chlorine, Clz, to form 340.2 g of silicon(IV) chloride,


Use this information to calculate the stoichiometry of the reaction.


(A, values: Cl = 35.5, Si = 28.1)


Significant figures


When we perform chemical calculations it is important that we give the answer to the number of significant
figures that fits with the data provided. The examples here show the number 526.84 rounded up to varying


numbers of significant figures.
rounded to 4 significant figures = 526.8


rounded to 3 significant figures = 527


rounded to 2 significant figures = 530


IMPORTANT


When you are writing an answer to a calculation, the answer should be to the same number of


significant figures as the least number of significant figures in the data.
Do not round numbers to the correct number of significant figures until the end of a calculation or you


risk introducing errors.


 


Percentage composition by mass
We can use the formula of a compound and relative atomic masses to calculate the percentage by mass of


a particular element in a compound.


atomic mass x number of moles of particular element in a compound


 


% by mass


 


molar mass of compound


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
7 How many moles of calcium oxide are there in 2.9 g of calcium oxide?
(A, values: Ca = 40.1, O = 16.0)


Solution
If you divide 2.9 by 56.1, your calculator shows 0.051 693 ... The least number of significant figures
in the data, however, is 2 (the mass is 2.9 g). So your answer should be expressed to 2 significant


figures, as 0.052 mol.


Note:
Zeros before a number are not significant figures. For example, 0.004 is only to 1 significant


figure.
After the decimal point, zeros after a number are significant figures. 0.0040 has 2 significant


figures and 0.004 00 has 3 significant figures.
If you are performing a calculation with several steps, do not round up in between steps. Round


up at the end.
8 Calculate the percentage by mass of iron in oxide,
(A, values: Fe = 55.8, O = 16.0)


Solution
2x 55.8
% mass of iron = x 100

(2 x 55.8) + (3 x 16.0)
= 69.9%


 
Figure 3.16: This iron ore is impure Fe203. We can calculate the mass of iron that can be obtained from Fe203 by


using molar masses.


 


 


Question


10 Calculate the percentage by mass of carbon in ethanol,


(A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0, O = 16.0)


Percentage yield
In many chemical reactions, especially organic reactions, not all the reactants are changed to the products
you want. This is because there are other reactions going on at the same time; reactants or products are
lost to the atmosphere; or the reaction does not go to completion. The percentage yield tells you how much
of a particular product you get from the reactants compared with the maximum theoretical amount that


you Can get.


actual yield


percentage yield = 100
predicted yield (theoretical yield)


The actual yield is the moles or mass of product obtained by experiment.
The predicted yield is the moles or mass of product obtained by calculation if no side products are formed


and all of a specific reactant is converted to a specific product.


WORKED EXAMPLE
9 Asample of aluminium chloride, is made by reacting 18 g of aluminium powder with excess
chlorine. The mass of aluminium chloride produced is 71.0 g. Calculate the percentage yield of


aluminium oxide. (A, values: Al = 27.0, Cl = 35.5)
2Al + >


Solution
Step 1: Calculate the predicted mass from the stoichiometry of the equation if all the
aluminium is converted to aluminium chloride.
2 x Al produces


2 x (27 + (3 x 35.5)) g


54 g Al produces 267 g AICl3
Step 2: Calculate the mass of aluminium chloride formed from the given amount of aluminium


using simple proportion.
1


18 g Al produces 267 x = =


Step 3: Calculate the percentage yield.
x 100 = 79.8%


89.0


 


Empirical formulae
The empirical formula of a compound is the simplest whole number ratio of the elements present in one
molecule or formula unit of the compound. The molecular formula of a compound shows the number of


atoms of each element present in a molecule.


Table 3.5 shows the empirical and molecular formulae for a number of compounds.
The formula for an ionic compound is always its empirical formula.


The empirical formula and molecular formula for simple inorganic molecules are often the same.


Organic molecules often have different empirical and molecular formulae.


sulfur dioxide SOz


Table 3.5: Some empirical and molecular formulae.


 


 
Question
the empirical formula of:
hydrazine,
CgHig
c benzene,
NH3


The empirical formula can be found by determining the mass of each element present in a sample of the
compound. For some compounds this can be done by combustion. An organic compound must be very pure


in order to calculate its empirical formula.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 

10 Deduce the formula of magnesium oxide.

Solution


This can be found as follows:
burn mass of magnesium (0.486 g) in excess oxygen


record the mass of magnesium oxide formed (0.806 g)
calculate the mass of oxygen that has combined with the magnesium (0.806 — 0.486 g) = 0.320



e calculate the mole ratio of magnesium to oxygen


e (A, values: Mg = 24.3, = 16.0)
0.486 g
24.3 g mol!
0.320 g


16.0 g mol?

moles of Mg = = 0.0200 mol
moles of oxygen = = 0.0200 mol



The simplest ratio of magnesium : oxygen is 1: 1. So the empirical formula of magnesium oxide is


MgO.
11 When 1.55 g of phosphorus is completely combusted 3.55 g of an oxide of phosphorus is produced.


Deduce the empirical formula of this oxide of phosphorus.


(A, values: O = 16.0, P = 31.0)
    


      
Solution
Step 1: note the mass of each element 3.55 — 1.55 = 2.00
9g


Step 2: divide by atomic masses 2.00 g
16.0 g mol


= 0.125 mol
  

 

Step 3: divide by the lowest figure 0.05


0.05
Step 4: if needed, obtain the lowest whole number ratio to get empirical


formula


Table 3.6: Steps to deduce an empirical formula.


 


 
An empirical formula can also be deduced from data that give the percentage composition by mass of the


elements in a compound.


WORKED EXAMPLE
12 of carbon and hydrogen contains 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen by mass. Deduce


the empirical formula of this hydrocarbon.


(A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0)


Solution


Step 1: note the % by mass


Step 3: divide by the lowest figure


 


Step 2: divide by A; values


Empirical formula is


 


Question
12 The composition by mass of a hydrocarbon is 10% hydrogen and 90% carbon. Deduce the empirical


formula of this hydrocarbon.


values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0)


Molecular formulae
The molecular formula shows the actual number of each of the different atoms present in a molecule. We
use the molecular formula to write balanced equations and to calculate molar masses. The molecular
formula is always a multiple of the empirical formula. For example, the molecular formula of ethane,


is twice the empirical formula, CH3.


In order to deduce the molecular formula we need to know:
the relative formula mass of the compound


the empirical formula.


WORKED EXAMPLE
13 has the empirical formula Its relative molecular mass is 187.8. Deduce the


molecular formula of this compound.
(A, values: Br = 79.9, C = 12.0, H = 1.0)


Solution


Step 1: Find the empirical formula mass: 12.0 + (2 x 1.0) + 79.9 = 93.9


 
: 187.8
Divide the relative molecular mass by the empirical formula mass: =2


Step 3: Multiply the number of atoms in the empirical formula by the number in step 2:


2 x so molecular formula is


 


Question
13 The empirical formulae and molar masses of three compounds, A, B and C, are shown in Table 3.7.


Calculate the molecular formula of each of these compounds.


(A, values: C = 12.0, Cl = 35.5, H = 1.0)


Compound Empirical formula


112


 

Table 3.7: Information table for Question 13.



3.6 Chemical formulae and chemical equations


Deducing the formula for ionic and covalent compounds


lonic compounds
The electronic structure of the individual elements in a compound determines the formula of a compound
(see Section 2.1). The formula of an ionic compound is determined by the charges on each of the ions
present. The number of positive charges is balanced by the number of negative charges so that the total
charge on the compound is zero. We can work out the formula for a compound if we know the charges on
the ions. Figure 3.17 shows the charges on some ions related to the position of the elements in the Periodic
Table. The form of the Periodic Table that we shall be using has 18 groups because the transition elements


are numbered as Groups 3 to 12. So, aluminium is in Group 13 and chlorine is in Group 17.
For simple metal ions in Groups 1 and 2, the value of the positive charge is the same as the group number.
For a simple metal ion in Group 13, the value of the positive charge is 3+. For a simple non-metal ion in
Groups 15 to 17, the value of the negative charge is 18 minus the group number. The charge on the ions of


transition elements can vary. For example, iron forms two types of ions, and Fe?* (Figure 3.18).


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
18
H* 13 none
| none
| none
none
transition


elements


 


 


Figure 3.17: The charge on some simple ions is related to their position in the Periodic Table.


 


 




Figure 3.18: chloride (left) and chloride (right). These two chlorides of iron both contain iron and chlorine,


but they have different formulae.


 
The roman numerals after the ions are called oxidation numbers.

There are rules for deducing oxidation numbers (see Section 7.2):
For most metal ions in Groups 1 to 3, the oxidation numbers are equal to the positive charge on the
ion, e.g. an ion has an oxidation number of +3. When naming compounds containing these ions,
we do not include the oxidation number of the positive ion, e.g. magnesium oxide (not


oxide).
Simple negative ions have oxidation numbers which are the same as the charge on the ion, e.g.


has an oxidation number of —2 and has an oxidation number of —1. When naming compounds
containing these ions we do not include the oxidation number of the negative ion as these do not


generally vary.
For transition elements, the oxidation numbers do vary. They show the charge on the ion, e.g.


chloride contains a Cr2* ion and chloride contains a ion. When naming


these compounds we must include the oxidation number to avoid confusion.
lons that contain more than one type of atom are called compound ions. Some common compound ions
and two metal ions that you should learn are listed in Table 3.8. The formula for an ionic compound is


obtained by balancing the charges of the ions.


Table 3.8: The formulae of some common ions.


 


 


WORKED EXAMPLES
14 Deduce the formula of magnesium chloride.

Solution

lons present: Mg2* and
For electrical neutrality, we need two ions for every Mg 2* ion.


(2 x 2+) =0


So the formula is
Deduce the formula of aluminium oxide.
lons present: and
For electrical neutrality, we need three O27 ions for every two ions.


(3 x + (2 x 3+) =0


So the formula is


 


Covalent compounds
You can work out the formula of a covalent compound from the number of electrons needed to achieve the
stable electronic configuration of a noble gas (see Section 4.1). In general, carbon atoms form four bonds
with other atoms, hydrogen and halogen atoms form one bond and oxygen atoms form two bonds. So the
formula of water, follows these rules. The formula for methane is CH,, with each carbon atom bonding


with four hydrogen atoms. However, there are many exceptions to these rules.
Compounds containing a simple metal ion and non-metal ion are named by changing the end of the name


of the non-metal element to ‘-ide’.
sodium + chlorine > sodium chloride

zinc + sulfur > zinc sulfide
The names of compound ions containing oxygen often end in ‘-ate’. Sometimes they end in ‘-ite’. For
example, the sulfate ion contains sulfur and four oxygen atoms, the phosphate ion contains phosphorus
and oxygen.




Question
14 Write down the formula of each of the following compounds:
i magnesium nitrate
ii calcium sulfate
sodium iodide
hydrogen bromide

sodium sulfide


b each of the following compounds:
i
ii


Balancing chemical equations
When chemicals react, atoms cannot be either created or destroyed. So there must be the same number of
each type of atom on the reactants side of a chemical equation as there are on the products side. A symbol
equation is a shorthand way of describing a chemical reaction. It shows the number and type of the atoms
in the reactants and the number and type of atoms in the products. If this number of each type of atom is
the same on both sides, we say the equation is balanced. Follow these examples to see how we balance an


equation.


IMPORTANT


When balancing chemical equations remember:


Do not change any of the formulae.


The numbers used to balance are put in front of the formulae.
In equations involving combustion reactions of organic compounds, balance the carbon first and


then the hydrogen. Balance the oxygen last.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 

16 Write a balanced equation for the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen to form water.

Solution
Step 1: Write down the formulae of all the reactants and products. For example:

+ >

Step 2: Count the number of atoms of each reactant and product.
H,

2[H] 2[H] +
Step 3: Balance one of the atoms by placing a number in front of one of the reactants or
products. In this case the oxygen atoms on the right-hand side need to be balanced, so
that they are equal in number to those on the left-hand side. Remember that the
number in front multiplies everything in the formula. For example, has 4 hydrogen


atoms and 2 oxygen atoms.
H,
4[H] + 2[0]


Step 4: Keep balancing in this way, one type of atom at a time until all the atoms are balanced.
2H,


4[H] +
Note that when you balance an equation you must not change the formulae of any of the reactants


or products.
17 Write a balanced equation for the reaction of oxide with carbon monoxide to form iron and

carbon dioxide.

Solution
Step 1: Formulae:


Fe,03 + CO > Fe + CO,
Step 2: Count the number of atoms.
Fe,03 + CO Fe + CO,
2[Fe] 1[C] 1[Fe]


1[0] 2[0]
Step 3: Balance the iron.
Fe,03 + 2Fe +
2[Fe] 1[C] 2[Fe] + 1[C]


3[0] 2[0]
Step 4: Balance the oxygen.
Fe,03 + 3CO 2Fe +
2[Fe] 2[Fe]



In step 4, the oxygen in the COz comes from two places, the and the CO. Note that trial and


error is involved here as the carbon also needs to be balanced.


 
In this particular case, in order to balance the equation, three oxygen atoms come from the iron


oxide and three oxygen atoms come from the carbon monoxide.


IMPORTANT


When balancing chemical equations follow these steps:
Write the formulae of the reactants and products
Count the numbers of atoms in each reactant and product


Balance the atoms one at a time until all the atoms are balanced.


 
Question
Write balanced equations for the following reactions.


reacts with hydrochloric acid to form chloride, FeClz, and hydrogen.
b hydroxide, Al(OH)3, breaks down on heating to form aluminium oxide, and

water.
burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water.


Using state symbols
We sometimes find it useful to specify the physical states of the reactants and products in a chemical
reaction. This is especially important where chemical equilibria and rates of reaction are being discussed


(see Chapter 8 and Chapter 9). We use the following state symbols:
(s) solid
e (1) liquid


* gas


(aq) aqueous (a solution in water).


State symbols are written after the formula of each reactant and product. For example:


ZnCO3(s) + > + +
Question


16 Write balanced equations, including state symbols, for the following reactions.
Solid calcium carbonate reacts with aqueous hydrochloric acid to form water, carbon dioxide and


an aqueous solution of calcium chloride.


b aqueous solution of zinc sulfate, reacts with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide.


The products are a precipitate of zinc hydroxide, and an aqueous solution of sodium sulfate.


 


Figure 3.19: The reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid.


 


The equation for the reaction shown in Figure 3.19, with all the state symbols, is:


+ > + +
Question
Which is the correct equation for the reaction between oxide and carbon monoxide?
3CO(g) > 2Fe(s) +
+ 2CO(g) > 2Fe(s) +
3CO(g) > 2Fe(s) +


D


+ 3CO(g) > 4Fe(s) +


Balancing ionic equations
When ionic compounds dissolve in water, the ions separate from each other. For example:


NaCl(s) + aq > Nat(aq) +
lonic compounds include salts such as sodium bromide, magnesium sulfate and ammonium nitrate. Acids
and alkalis also contain ions. For example, H*(aq) and ions are present in hydrochloric acid and Na*


(aq) and ions are present in sodium hydroxide.
Many chemical reactions in aqueous solution involve ionic compounds. Only some of the ions in solution


take part in these reactions.


The ions that play no part in the reaction are called spectator ions.
An ionic equation is simpler than a full chemical equation. It shows only the ions or other particles taking
part in a reaction. Spectator ions are omitted (left out). lonic equations are often written for reactions
involving a change in oxidation state. Compare the full equation for the reaction of zinc with aqueous


sulfate with the ionic equation.
full chemical equation:


Zn(s) + + Cu(s)
with charges:


Zn(s) + + Cu(s)
cancelling spectator ions:


Zn(s) + Cu2* +
ionic equation:


Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) > + Cu(s)


In the ionic equation you will notice that:
there are no sulfate ions: these are the spectator ions as they have not changed


both the charges and the atoms are balanced.


IMPORTANT


When writing an ionic equation remember:
The product(s) will often include a precipitate or simple molecules such as iodine or water e.g.


+ > +


e Acids are represented by Ht ions, e.g. ZnO(s) + 2H*(aq) > +


 


The next examples show how we can change a full equation into an ionic equation.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 


18 Writing an ionic equation:


Solution
Step 1: Write down the full balanced equation.


Mg(s) + +
Step 2: Write down all the ions present. Any reactant or product that has a state symbol (s), (I)
or (g) or is a covalent molecule in solution such as chlorine, does not split into

ions.
Mg(s) + 2H*(aq) + >
+ +


Step 3: Cancel the ions that appear on both sides of the equation (the spectator ions).
Mg(s) + 2H*(aq) +


Mg?*(aq) +
Step 4: Write down the equation omitting the spectator ions.
Mg(s) + 2H*(aq) + H2(g)
19 Write the ionic equation for the reaction of aqueous chlorine with aqueous potassium bromide. The
products are aqueous bromine and aqueous potassium chloride.
Solution


Step 1: The full balanced equation is:
+ 2KBr(aq) >


+ 2KCI(aq)
Step 2: The ions present are:
+ 2K*(aq) + >


+ 2K*(aq) +


Step 3: Cancel the spectator ions:
+ + >


+ +


Step 4: Write the final ionic equation:


+ > +


 

Questions

18 Change these full equations to ionic equations.

+ 2NaOH(aq) > +
+ >

19 Write ionic equations for these precipitation reactions.


+ 2NaOH(aq) +
+ > + 2KNO3(aq)
Chemists usually prefer to write ionic equations for precipitation reactions. A precipitation reaction is a
reaction where two aqueous solutions react to form a solid: the precipitate. For these reactions the method


of writing the ionic equation can be simplified. All you have to do is:
write the formula of the precipitate as the product


write the ions that go to make up the precipitate as the reactants.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
20 An aqueous solution of sulfate reacts with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide. A


precipitate of hydroxide is formed, together with an aqueous solution of sodium sulfate.


Solution
Step 1: Write the full balanced equation

FeSO,(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) > Fe(OH)2(s) +
Step 2: Identify the precipitate formed:


Fe(OH)2(s)
Step 3: Identify the ions which form the precipitate:


Fe2+(aq) and
Step 4: Write the ionic equation:


Fe?*(aq) + >


REFLECTION
1 Work with another learner to discuss these points:
What are the stages in balancing a chemical equation?
b What sort of problems have you found when trying to write ionic equations?


How do you know which species to include in the equation?
Make a list of the key words in this chapter so far, e.g. mole, and see if you can explain their


meaning to another learner.
Work with another learner to discuss an activity (it could be memory aid or a game) to help you
learn how to write formulae or do mole calculations. Can you teach this to someone else in your

class?



3.7 Solutions and concentration


Calculating the concentration of a solution
The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute dissolved in a solvent to make 1 dm3 (one cubic
decimetre) of solution. The solvent is usually water. There are 1000 cm? in a cubic decimetre. When 1


mole of a compound is dissolved to make 1 dm? of solution the concentration is 1 mol


number of moles of solute (mol)


 
concentration (mol =


volume of solution
We use the terms ‘concentrated’ and ‘dilute’ to refer to the relative amount of solute in the solution. A
solution with a low concentration of solute is a dilute solution. If there is a high concentration of solute, the


solution is concentrated.


When performing calculations involving concentrations in mol you need to:


change mass in grams to moles


change cm? to dm? (by dividing the number of cm? by 1000).


IMPORTANT


When making solutions of known concentration, you dissolve a weighed amount of solute in a small
amount of solvent. Then you make it up to the required volume by adding more solvent. You do not
add the solute to the required final volume of solvent because the total volume of the solution may


then change.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
21 Calculate the concentration in mol of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, if 250 cm? of a solution


contains 2.0 g of sodium hydroxide.
Solution


(M, value: NaOH = 40.0)


Step 1: Change grams to moles.
= 0.050 mol NaOH


40.0
Step 2: Change cm? to dm3.


250 cm? = 0.25 dm?
Step 3: Calculate concentration.
0.050 1



0.25 (mol*)


 


 


Figure 3.20: The concentration of chlorine in the water in a swimming pool must be carefully controlled.


 
We often need to calculate the mass of a substance present in a solution of known concentration and


volume. To do this we:
rearrange the concentration equation to:
number of moles (mol) = concentration (mol x volume


multiply the moles of solute by its molar mass


mass of solute (g) = number of moles (mol) x molar mass (g


WORKED EXAMPLE
22 Calculate the mass of anhydrous copper(II) sulfate in 55 of a 0.20 mol solution of


sulfate. (A, values: Cu = 63.5, O = 16.0, S = 32.1)


Solution


Step 1: Change cm? to dm?.
9.055 dm?
1000


Step 2: moles = concentration (mol x volume of solution (dm?)


= 0.20 x 0.055 = 0.011 mol
Step 3: mass (g) = moles x M
= 0.011 x (63.5 + 32.1 + (4 x 16.0))


= 1.8 g (to 2 significant figures)


 


Question
20 Calculate the concentration, in mol of the following solutions: (A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0,


Na = 23.0, O = 16.0)
i a solution of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, containing 2.0 g of sodium hydroxide in 50 cm? of


solution
solution of ethanoic acid, containing 12.0 g of ethanoic acid in 250 cm? of


solution.
b the number of moles of solute dissolved in each of the following:


i cm? of aqueous nitric acid of concentration 0.2 mol

ii cm? of calcium hydroxide solution of concentration 0.01 mol



PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 3.2


 


Carrying out a titration
A procedure called a titration is used to determine the amount of substance present in a solution of
unknown concentration. There are several different kinds of titration. One of the commonest involves


the exact neutralisation of an alkali by an acid (Figure 3.21).


 
Figure 3.21: a A funnel is used to fill the burette with hydrochloric acid. b A graduated pipette is used to measure
25.0 cm3 of sodium hydroxide solution into a conical flask. ¢ An indicator called litmus is added to the sodium
hydroxide solution, which turns blue. d 12.5 cm3 of hydrochloric acid from the burette have been added to the 25.0
of alkali in the conical flask. The litmus has gone red, showing that this volume of acid was just enough to


neutralise the alkali.


 
If we want to determine the concentration of a solution of sodium hydroxide of unknown concentration

we use the following procedure.
e volumetric pipette to place a given volume (usually 10 cm? or 25 cm3) of sodium hydroxide of

unknown concentration into a flask.

e Get some of acid of known concentration, e.g. hydrochloric acid of concentration 1.00 mol

e a clean burette with the acid (after having washed the burette with a little of the acid).


e Record the initial burette reading.


e Add a few drops of an indicator solution to the alkali in the flask, e.g. methyl orange.
e Slowly add the acid from the burette to the flask, swirling the flask all the time until the indicator


changes colour (the end-point).
e Record the final burette reading. The final reading minus the initial reading is called the titre. This


first titre is normally known as a ‘rough’ value.


e Repeat this process, adding the acid drop by drop near the end-point.


e Repeat again, until you have two titres that are no more than 0.10 cm? apart.


e Take the average of these two titre values.


Your results should be recorded in a table, looking like this:


 


Initial burette reading / cm3


Titre / cm? 35.20 34.65 35.00 34.75


Table 3.9: Example results table.


 

You should note:

e all burette readings are given to an accuracy of 0.05 cm?


e the units are shown like this: / cm?
the two titres that are no more than 0.10 cm? apart are 1 and 3, so they would be averaged

e the average titre is 34.70 cm?.

In every titration there are five important things you need to know or work out:

balanced equation for the reaction

2 volume of the solution from the burette (in this example this is hydrochloric acid)


concentration of the solution in the burette


4 volume of the solution in the titration flask (in this example this is sodium hydroxide)


5 the concentration of the solution in the titration flask.
If we know four of these five things, we can calculate the fifth. So, in order to calculate the


concentration of sodium hydroxide in the flask, we need to know the first four of these points.


 


Calculating solution concentration by titration
A titration is often used to find the exact concentration of a solution. Worked example 23 shows the steps
used to calculate the concentration of a solution of sodium hydroxide when it is neutralised by aqueous


sulfuric acid of known concentration and volume.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
23 25.0 cm? of a solution of sodium hydroxide is exactly neutralised by 15.10 cm? of sulfuric acid of


concentration 0.200 mol


2NaOH + > +


Calculate the concentration, in mol of the sodium hydroxide solution.
Solution
Step 1: Calculate how many moles of acid.
moles = concentration (mol x
volume of solution (dm3)
0.200 x 0.00302 mol
1000


Step 2: Use the stoichiometry of the balanced equation to calculate how many moles of NaOH.
moles of NaOH =


moles of acid (from step 1) x 2


= 0.00604 mol


Step 3: Calculate the concentration of NaOH.
F mumber of moles of solute
concentration =

( ) volume of solution (dm*)

0.0250
= 0.242 mol dm?


Note:


e Inthe first step we use the reagent for which the concentration and volume are both known.
e Instep 2, we multiply by 2 because the balanced equation shows that 2 mol of NaOH reacts with


every 1 mol of


e 3, we divide by 0.0250 because we have changed to dm? 0.0250 =
The answer is given to 3 significant figures because the smallest number of significant figures in


the data is 3.
IMPORTANT


When doing calculations from the results of titrations, remember:
average only those titres which are very close to each other, e.g. within 0.1-0.2 of each other,


and ignore the rough (rangefinder) titration.
keep the units the same. It is often easier to convert volumes in cm? to dm? because solution


concentration is usually given in mol


Note that in some older books M is sometimes used in place of mol


 
Question
21 The equation for the reaction of strontium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid is shown below.


Sr(OH) + 2HCI +


25.0 cm? of a solution of strontium hydroxide was exactly neutralised by 15.00 of 0.100 mol
hydrochloric acid. Calculate the concentration, in mol of the strontium hydroxide


solution.


b cm? of a 0.400 mol solution of sodium hydroxide was exactly neutralised by 25.25 cm3
of sulfuric acid. Calculate the concentration, in mol of the sulfuric acid. The equation for the


reaction is:


+ 2NaOH > +


Deducing stoichiometry by titration
We can use titration results to find the stoichiometry of a reaction. In order to do this, we need to know the
concentrations and the volumes of both the reactants. Worked example 24 shows how to determine the


stoichiometry of the reaction between a metal hydroxide and an acid.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
24 25.0 cm? of a 0.0500 mol solution of a metal hydroxide was titrated against a solution of 0.200
mol hydrochloric acid. It required 12.50 cm? of hydrochloric acid to exactly neutralise the


metal hydroxide. Deduce the stoichiometry of this reaction.


Solution
Step 1: Calculate the number of moles of each reagent.
moles of metal hydroxide = concentration (mol x volume of solution (dm*)
= 25.0 3
= 0.0500 x 1.25


moles of hydrochloric acid = concentration (mol x volume of solution (dm*)
12.50 3


= 0.200 x = 2.50 x 10 mol


Step 2: Deduce the simplest mole ratio of metal hydroxide to hydrochloric acid.


1.25 x 1073 moles of hydroxide : 2.50 x moles of acid = 1 hydroxide : 2 acid
Step 3: Write the equation.


+ 2HCI > +
One mole of hydroxide ions neutralises one mole of hydrogen ions. As one mole of the metal
hydroxide neutralises two moles of hydrochloric acid, the metal hydroxide must contain two


hydroxide ions in each formula unit.


 


Questions
22 20.0 cm? of a metal hydroxide of concentration 0.0600 mol was titrated with 0.100 mol
hydrochloric acid. It required 24.00 cm? of the hydrochloric acid to exactly neutralise the metal


hydroxide.
the number of moles of metal hydroxide used.
b the number of moles of hydrochloric acid used.


What is the simplest mole ratio of metal hydroxide to hydrochloric acid?
a balanced equation for this reaction using your answers to parts a, b and c to help you.


Use the symbol M for the metal.
23 0.4 moles of aluminium sulfate, Al,(SO,)3, are dissolved in water and the volume of the solution was

made up to 500 Which one of these statements is correct?

contains a total of 2 moles of ions.


The concentration of aluminium ions is 0.8 mol
concentration of sulfate ions in solution is 1.2 mol

D
The solution contains a total of 4 moles of ions.


3.8 Calculations involving gas volumes


Using the molar gas volume
In 1811 the Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro suggested that equal volumes of all gases contain the same
number of molecules. This is called hypothesis. This idea is approximately true as long as the
pressure is not too high or the temperature too low. It is convenient to measure volumes of gases at room
temperature (20 °C) and pressure (1 atmosphere). At room temperature and pressure (r.t.p.) one mole of
any gas has a volume of 24.0 dm3. So, 24.0 of carbon dioxide and 24.0 of hydrogen both contain


one mole of gas molecules.


We can use the molar gas volume of 24.0 dm? at to find:


the volume of a given mass or number of moles of gas


the mass or number of moles of a given volume of gas.


  


WORKED EXAMPLES
  


 


25 Calculate the volume of 0.40 mol of nitrogen at
    
     
  
  
    


    


Solution
volume (in = 24.0 x number of moles of gas


= 24.0 x 0.40 =


26 Calculate the mass of methane, present in 120 cm? of methane. (M, value: methane = 16.0)


Solution
1
120 cm? is 0.120 dm? 0.120


1000


volume of methane


24.0
— _


5 x mol
massofmethane = 5 x x 16.0


= 0.080 g methane


moles of methane =


  


Question


24 Calculate the volume, in dm3, occupied by 26.4 g of carbon dioxide at


(A, values: C = 12.0, O = 16.0)
flask of volume 120 is filled with helium gas at r.t.p. Calculate the mass of helium present


in the flask. (A, value: He = 4.0)


 



Figure 3.22: Anaesthetists have to know about gas volumes so that patients remain unconscious during major


operations.


 

Gas volumes and stoichiometry

We can use the ratio of reacting volumes of gases to deduce the stoichiometry of a reaction. If we mix 20


cm? of hydrogen with 10 cm? of oxygen and explode the mixture, we will find that the gases have exactly
reacted together and no hydrogen or oxygen remains. According to Avogadro’s hypothesis, equal volumes
of gases contain equal numbers of molecules and therefore equal numbers of moles of gases. So the mole


ratio of hydrogen to oxygen is 2 : 1. We can summarise this as:


hydrogen + oxygen — water
(H, 0)
20 cm? 10
ratio of moles 2 1


equation + — 2H,O
We can extend this idea to experiments involving combustion data of hydrocarbons. Worked example 27
shows how the formula of propane and the stoichiometry of the equation can be deduced. Propane is a


hydrocarbon: a compound of carbon and hydrogen only.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
27 When 50 cm? of propane reacts exactly with 250 cm? of oxygen, 150 cm? of carbon dioxide is

formed.
propane + oxygen carbon dioxide + water
(O2) (CO2) (H20)


50cm? 150


Solution
ratio of moles:
5 3
As 1 mole of propane produces 3 moles of carbon dioxide, there must be 3 moles of carbon atoms in
one mole of propane, x = 3.


C3Hy + 502 > + ZH20
The 5 moles of oxygen molecules are used to react with both the carbon and the hydrogen in the
propane. 3 moles of these oxygen molecules have been used in forming carbon dioxide. So 5 — 3 =
2 moles of oxygen molecules must be used in reacting with the hydrogen to form water. There are 4

moles of atoms in 2 moles of oxygen molecules, so there must be 4 moles of water formed.
+ 502 3CO +



So there must be 8 hydrogen atoms in 1 molecule of propane.


C3Hg + 50> +


 


Questions
25 50 cm? of a gaseous hydride of phosphorus, PH, reacts with exactly 150 cm? of chlorine, to form


liquid phosphorus trichloride and 150 of hydrogen chloride gas, HCI.
How many moles of chlorine react with 1 mole of the gaseous hydride?
the formula of the phosphorus hydride.


Write a balanced equation for the reaction.
26 What is the volume of carbon dioxide produced when 14 g of ethene, reacts with excess oxygen?


(M, ethene = 28)
+ +
dm3
B dm?
C 0.0467


D


12.0


REFLECTION
Make a list of the chemical expressions that you have learned during this chapter, e.g. the


relationship between moles, mass and relative molecular mass.


Compare your list with another learner then write the expressions out in as many different ways
mass
as you can, e.g. the expression density = could be rewritten as mass = density x volume


volume


What problems did you come across? How did you solve them?


 


SUMMARY


Unified atomic mass unit is one twelfth of the mass of a carbon-12 atom.
Relative atomic mass is the ratio of the weighted average mass of atoms in a given sample of an element to the


unified atomic mass unit.
The mass spectrometer can be used to determine atomic masses and isotopic abundances, to deduce the molecular
mass of an organic compound and to deduce the formula of an organic molecule from its fragmentation pattern and


isotopic ratios.


One mole of a substance is the amount of substance that has the Avogadro number of specified particles (6.02 x


1023). The particles can be atoms, molecules, ions or electrons.
Molecular formulae show the total number of atoms of each element present in one molecule or one formula unit of

the compound. Empirical formulae show the simplest whole number ratio of atoms in a compound.
The mole concept can be used to calculate:

reacting masses


volumes of gases


volumes and concentrations of solutions.
The stoichiometry of a reaction can be obtained from calculations involving reacting masses, gas volumes, and

volumes and concentrations of solutions.



 


 


State the meaning of the term relative atomic mass. [1]
ii of boron was found to have the following % composition by mass: 19B


(18.7%), (81.3%)
Calculate a value for the relative atomic mass of boron. Give your answer to 3 [2]


significant figures.
ions, can be formed by bombarding gaseous boron with high-energy [1]


electrons. Deduce the number of electrons in one B3* ion.


is present in compounds called borates.
i Use the A, values below to calculate the relative molecular mass of borate,



1

(A, values: Fe = 55.8, B = 10.8, O = 16.0)
ii The accurate relative atomic mass of iron, Fe, is 55.8. Explain why the accurate

relative atomic mass is not a whole number.


[Total: 6]


question is about some metals and metal compounds.
aii Hafnium, Hf, forms a hydrated peroxide whose formula can be written as
HfO3:2H20. Use the A, values below to calculate the relative molecular mass of


hydrated hafnium peroxide.
1


(A, values: Hf = 178.5, H = 1.0, O = 16.0)
1


ii What is meant by the term hydrated salt?
A particular isotope of hafnium has 72 protons and a nucleon number of 180. Write the


isotopic symbol for this isotope, showing this information.


c mass spectrum of zirconium is shown below.


 

 

100 -





~

604







<
205
=

|


T T


90 95


Mass/charge (m/e) ratio


[1]


i Give the isotopic symbol for the most abundant isotope of zirconium.
ii Use the information from this mass spectrum to calculate the relative atomic mass [2]


of zirconium. Give your answer to 3 significant figures.
mass spectra show accurate relative isotopic masses. State the [1]


meaning of the term relative isotopic mass?
of 15.2 g of tin(IV) oxide is mixed with 2.41 g of carbon and heated. A reaction


occurs.


+ 2C > Sn + 2CO


Show by calculation that the reagent in excess is tin(IV) oxide. (A, values: Sn = 118.7, C [2]


= 12.0, O = 16.0).
of zirconium is made by reacting 58.30 g of zirconium tetrachloride, with


excess magnesium.
+ 2Mg > Zr +
The mass of zirconium produced is 20.52 g. Calculate the percentage yield of zirconium. [2]


(A, values: Zr = 91.2, Cl = 35.5, Mg = 24.3)
[Total: 11]


3 Solid sodium carbonate reacts with aqueous hydrochloric acid to form aqueous sodium
chloride, carbon dioxide and water.
+ > 2NaCl + +


[1]


Rewrite this equation to include state symbols.
b the number of moles of hydrochloric acid required to react exactly with 4.15 g [3]


of sodium carbonate. (A, values: C = 12.0, Na = 23.0, O = 16.0, H = 1.0, Cl = 35.5)
[1]
c Define the term mole.
solution of 25.0 cm? sodium carbonate of concentration 0.0200 mol is
titrated with hydrochloric acid. The volume of hydrochloric acid required to exactly react
with the sodium carbonate is 12.50
i Calculate the number of moles of sodium carbonate present in the solution of
sodium carbonate.
2
ii Calculate the concentration of the hydrochloric acid.
e How many moles of carbon dioxide are produced when 0.2 mol of sodium carbonate
reacts with excess hydrochloric acid?


f Calculate the volume of this number of moles of carbon dioxide at r.t.p. (1 mol of gas


occupies 24 dm? at
[Total: 10]


are compounds of carbon and hydrogen only. Hydrocarbon Z is


composed of 80% carbon and 20% hydrogen.
3


the empirical formula of hydrocarbon Z. (A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0) (3]
b molar mass of hydrocarbon Z is 30.0 g Deduce the molecular formula of this


hydrocarbon.
When 50 cm? of hydrocarbon Y is burnt, it reacts with exactly 300 cm? of oxygen to form
200 cm? of carbon dioxide. Water is also formed in the reaction. Construct the equation [4]

for this reaction. Explain your reasoning.
has the molecular formula C3Hg. Calculate the mass of 600 cm? of propane at [2]


r.t.p. (1 mol of gas occupies 24 dm? at (A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0)
10]


5 When sodium reacts with titanium chloride sodium chloride (NaCl) and titanium
(Ti) are produced.


[2]


the balanced symbol equation for the reaction.
b Calculate the mass of titanium produced from 380 g of titanium chloride. Give your [2]


answer to 3 significant figures. (A, values: Ti = 47.9, Cl = 35.5)
Calculate the mass of titanium produced using 46.0 g of sodium. Give your answer to 3 [2]


significant figures. (A, value: Na = 23.0)
[Total: 6]


this question give all answers to 3 significant figures.
The reaction between NaOH and HCI can be written as:

HCI + NaOH NaCl +
In this reaction, 15.0 of hydrochloric acid was neutralised by 20.0 cm? of 0.0500 mol dm-3
sodium hydroxide.


10


11


12

the volume in dm? of:
1
i the acid
1
alkali


[1]
b the number of moles of alkali.


[2]


Calculate the number of moles of acid and then its concentration.
[Total: 5]


Give all answers to 3 significant figures.
Ammonium nitrate decomposes on heating to give nitrogen(II) oxide and water as


follows:
NH,NO3(s) > +
(A, values: N = 14.0; H = 1.0; O = 16.0)


[1]


[2]
Deduce the formula mass of ammonium nitrate.


b How many moles of ammonium nitrate are present in 0.800 g of the solid?
Calculate the volume of N20 gas that would be produced from this mass of ammonium [2]


nitrate?
[Total: 5]


Give all answers to 3 significant figures.


dm? of hydrogen chloride gas was dissolved in 100 cm? of water.
1
i Calculate the number of moles of hydrogen chloride gas present.
2
ii the concentration of the hydrochloric acid formed.
b cm? of the acid was then titrated against sodium hydroxide of concentration 0.200
mol to form NaCl and water:
NaOH + HCI > + NaCl
2
i Calculate the number of moles of acid used. (2]


[2]


ii Calculate the volume of sodium hydroxide used.
[Total: 7]


Give all answers to 3 significant figures.
4.80 dm? of chlorine gas was reacted with sodium hydroxide solution. The reaction


taking place was as follows:
+ 2NaOH(aq) > NaCl(aq) + +

(A, values: Na = 23.0; Cl = 35.5; O = 16.0)

1

the number of moles of Cl, reacted.

2

the mass of NaOCl formed.
concentration of the NaOH was 2.00 mol Calculate the volume of sodium [2]


hydroxide solution required.


[1]


Write an ionic equation for this reaction.
Total: 6


Calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid according to the equation: 1
CaO + > CaCl, +


A, values: H = 1.0; O = 16.0; Cl = 35.5; Ca = 40.1
the mass of calcium chloride formed when 28.05 g of calcium oxide reacts with [2]


excess hydrochloric acid.
[2]


[1]


Calculate the mass of hydrochloric acid that reacts with 28.05 g of calcium oxide.


Calculate the mass of water produced.
When ammonia gas and hydrogen chloride gas mix together, they react to form [Total: 5]


called ammonium chloride.

A, values: H = 1.0; N = 14.0; Cl = 35.5

2

a balanced equation for this reaction, including state symbols. (2]

3
the molar masses of ammonia, hydrogen chloride and ammonium chloride. (3]


Calculate the volumes of ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases that must react at r.t.p.


in order to produce 10.7 g of ammonium chloride? (1 mol of gas occupies 24 at [3]



: [Total: 8]


The mass spectrum of an organic compound with the structure is


shown.


 


 

 

43

80



2 60



29

15


20
3



0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70


Mass/charge ratio (m/e)


the fragments with mass/charge ratios of
i
ii 29
43


iv 58
compound, Z, has a molecular ion peak, M, with a relative abundance of
36.4% and an [M + 1] peak with a relative abundance of 4.8 %. Deduce the number of [2]


carbon atoms this compound contains.


mass spectrum of chlorobutane shows an [M + 2] peak beyond the M, peak. Explain
1
why there is an [M + 2] peak.
d_ The relative height of the [M + 2] peak in organic compound T is the same as that of the

M, peak. Explain how this shows that the compound contains one atom of bromine and [3]
not one atom of chlorine.
[Total: 10]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to

section more work there move on

define and use the terms unified atomic mass unit, relative

atomic mass, relative mass and relative formula mass
| analyse mass spectra in terms of isotopic mass spectra in terms of isotopic abundances 3.

deduce the accurate relative atomic mass of an element using

data from a mass spectrum

deduce the molecular mass of an organic molecule from the 33

molecular ion peak in a mass spectrum


suggest the identity of molecules formed by simple 33


fragmentation in a given mass spectrum
deduce the number of carbon atoms in a compound using the
[M + 1] peak and the relevant formula:
abundance of io
x


abundance of ion
deduce the presence of chlorine and bromine atoms in a


compound using the [M + 2] peak


define and use the terms mole and Avogadro and use the terms mole and define and use the terms mole and Avogadro constant
understand the meaning of the terms anhydrous, hydrated


and water of crystallisation
write formulae of ionic compounds from ionic charges and
oxidation numbers including:
prediction of ionic charge from the position of an
element in the Periodic Table
b of the names and formulae for the ions
HCO3~ and



write and construct balanced equations, including ionic


equations
define and use the terms empirical formula and molecular 3.5


formula


calculate empirical and molecular formulae using given calculate empirical and molecular formulae using given and molecular formulae using given data
perform calculations using the mole concept involving reacting


masses

| understand the terms excess reactant and limiting reactant the terms excess reactant and limiting reactant
perform calculations using mole concept involving

yield

volumes of gases


concentrations of solutions


d_ limiting reagents and excess reagent


 


 
deduce stoichiometry of a reaction using reacting masses,
volumes of gases and volumes and concentrations of


solutions.


 


images


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START


 
Take it in turns to explain to another learner what is meant by each of the following:
bonding
bonding
bonding


intermolecular forces
Mention the types of particles that are responsible for the attractive forces between the atoms or


ions.
labelled diagram of an ionic compound and a simple covalent compound. Compare your


diagrams with those of another learner.
Make a list of the typical physical properties of metals such as iron and non-meals such as sulfur.


Compare your list with the list made by others in the class.
another learner to select one of the first 20 elements in the Periodic Table. Can you deduce the
simple electronic configuration for an atom of this element? Take turns in doing this until you are


sure that you can write simple electronic configurations.
to another learner how to work out the number of electrons in the outer principal energy
level of atoms in Groups 1 and 2 and in Groups 13-18 (you may know Groups 13 to 18 as Groups 3


to 8)
Ask another learner to select one of the positive ions: sodium, magnesium or calcium, and one of
the negative ions: oxygen, chlorine or bromine. Draw the simple electronic configuration for the
positive and negative ions selected and then draw a dot-and-cross diagram for the compound


formed from these ions.
7 How confident are you in drawing dot-and-cross diagrams for molecules? Without looking at a

textbook, work with a partner to draw dot-and-cross diagrams for the following molecules:



chlorine
hydrogen chloride


e water


f ammonia
g oxygen


Show only the outer shell electrons.


Try this problem by yourself and then discuss your ideas with a partner.
Lone pairs of electrons repel each other more than a pair of electrons in a bond. Draw the
electronic structure of a methane molecule and a water molecule and suggest why the methane
molecule has an bond angle of about 109.5° but a water molecule has an bond


angle of 104.5°.


SKATING ON WATER


Figure 4.1: The intermolecular forces in water allow some insects to skate over its surface.


 
Some insects can skate across the surface of a pond (Figure 4.1). How do they do this? Part of the
answer is that water has unusual physical properties due to the strong forces of attraction
(intermolecular forces) between the water molecules. The unusually strong intermolecular forces in
water are due to hydrogen bonding. These attractive forces make it more difficult for water molecules
to slide over each other compared with most other liquids. A water molecule below the surface is
attracted equally in all directions to other water molecules. At the surface, where water and air meet,
there is hardly any attraction between the molecules in the air and the water molecules. But the water
molecules at the surface are strongly attracted to each other. So there is a downward force at the
surface of the liquid which pulls the surface inwards. This surface tension causes the surface of the
water to appear to have an elastic skin. You can float a paper clip on water to demonstrate surface


tension:


e Fill a glass right up to the top with water.


e Take a paper clip and lower it gently onto the surface of the water using a fork.
Skating insects take advantage of the high surface tension of water by having special features such as


wide feet. These feet are also covered in a hard layer which repels water.
Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
Suggest why skating insects have wide feet and not narrow feet.


Can you think of any liquids that do not mix with water and are lighter than water?
Suggest why a soft paper-like layer on insect’s feet would not allow them to stay on the surface of


the water.
Imagine that you are designing an insect that can skate perfectly on water. What other features

would be useful?



4.1 Types of chemical bonding


IMPORTANT


When elements form compounds, they either gain, lose or share electrons to get to the nearest stable
noble gas electronic configuration. There are exceptions to this rule for some Group 15, 16 and 17


elements.


 
lonic bonding is the electrostatic attraction between positive ions (cations) and negative ions (anions) in
an ionic crystal lattice. Covalent bonds are formed when the outer electrons of two atoms are shared. The
ionic or covalent bonds formed are usually very strong: it takes a lot of energy to break them. There is also


a third form of strong bonding: metallic bonding.
Although the atoms within molecules are kept together by strong covalent bonds, the forces between
molecules are weak. We call these weak forces between molecules van der Waals’ forces. The term van

der Waals’ forces is a general term used to describe all intermolecular forces.

There are several types of van der Waals forces:
dipole (instantaneous dipole-induced dipole (id-id) forces. These are also called London dispersion

forces.


permanent dipole-permanent dipole (pd-pd) forces.


hydrogen bonding, which is a stronger form of permanent dipole-permanent dipole force.
If you understand these different types of chemical bonding and understand intermolecular forces, this will


help you to explain the structure and some physical properties of elements and compounds.

4.2 lonic bonding

How are ions formed?

One way of forming ions is for atoms to gain or lose one or more electrons.
Positive ions are formed when an atom loses one or more electrons. Metal atoms usually lose electrons


and form positive ions.
e Negative ions are formed when an atom gains one or more electrons. Non-metal atoms usually gain


electrons and form negative ions.


The charge on the ion depends on the number of electrons lost or gained (see Section 2.4).
When metals combine with non-metals, the electrons in the outer shell of the metal atoms are transferred
to the non-metal atoms. Each non-metal atom usually gains enough electrons to fill its outer shell. As a
result of this, the metal atoms and non-metal atoms usually end up with outer electron shells that are


complete: they have the electronic configuration of a noble gas.


In Figure 4.2 we can see that:


the sodium ion has the same electronic structure as neon: [2,8]*


e the chloride ion has the same electronic structure as argon:
The strong force of attraction between the positive ions and negative ions in the ionic crystal lattice results
in an ionic bond. An ionic bond is sometimes called an electrovalent bond. In an ionic structure such as
sodium chloride crystals (Figure 4.3), the ions are arranged in a regular repeating pattern (see Chapter 5).
As a result of this, the force between one ion and the ions of opposite charge that surround it is very great.


In other words, ionic bonding is very strong.


—


@®) }


(Na*


Figure 4.2: The formation of a sodium ion and chloride ion by electron transfer.


 


 

Figure 4.3: These crystals of salt are made up of millions of sodium ions and chloride ions.



Dot-and-cross diagrams
You will notice that in Figure 4.2 we use dots and crosses to show the electronic configuration of the
chloride and sodium ions. This helps us keep track of where the electrons have come from. It does not
mean that the electron transferred is any different from the others. Diagrams like this are called dot-and-


cross diagrams.
When drawing a dot-and-cross diagram for an ionic compound it is usually acceptable to draw the outer
electron shell of the metal ion without any electrons. This is because it has transferred these electrons to


the negative ion. Figure 4.4 shows the outer shell dot-and-cross diagram for sodium chloride.


A dot-and-cross diagram shows:
e the outer electron shells only


e the charge of the ion is spread evenly, by using square brackets


the charge on each ion, written at the top right-hand corner.


=


 


Na


Figure 4.4: Dot-and-cross diagram for sodium chloride.


 


Some examples of dot-and-cross diagrams


Magnesium oxide
When magnesium reacts with oxygen to form magnesium oxide, the two electrons in the outer shell of
each magnesium atom are transferred to the incompletely filled orbitals of an oxygen atom. By losing two
electrons, each magnesium atom achieves the electronic configuration [2,8] (Figure 4.5). By gaining two
electrons, each oxygen atom achieves the electronic configuration [2,8]. [2,8] is the electronic
configuration of neon. It is sometimes called a noble-gas configuration. When ions or atoms have 8


electrons in their outer shell like this it is called an octet of electrons (the prefix oct means 8).


MgO


 


Figure 4.5: Dot-and-cross diagram for magnesium oxide.


 


Calcium fluoride
Each calcium atom has two electrons in its outer shell, and these can be transferred to two fluorine atoms.
By losing two electrons, each calcium atom achieves the electronic configuration [2,8,8] (Figure 4.6). The
two fluorine atoms each gain one electron to achieve the electronic configuration [2,8]. [2,8] is the


electronic configuration of neon; it is a ‘noble-gas configuration’.





|
27


Figure 4.6: Dot-and-cross diagram for calcium fluoride.


 


Question
dot-and-cross diagrams for the ions in the following ionic compounds. Show only the outer


electron shells.
chloride, KCI
b oxide,

oxide, CaO
d chloride, MgCl,


4.3 Covalent bonding


Single covalent bonds
When two non-metal atoms combine, they share one or more pairs of electrons. A shared pair of electrons
is called a single covalent bond, or a bond pair. A single covalent bond is represented by a single line


between the atoms: for example,
You can see that when chlorine atoms combine not all the electrons are used in bonding. The pairs of outer-


shell electrons not used in bonding are called lone pairs.


     


Figure 4.7: a Bromine and b iodine are elements. They both have simple covalent molecules.


 
Each atom in a chlorine molecule has three lone pairs of electrons and shares one bonding pair of electrons


(Figure 4.8).
a shared pair


of electrons is a


covalent bond

chlorine atoms chlorine molecule:


(2,8,7) each chlorine is now 2,8,8


Figure 4.8: Atoms of chlorine share electrons to form a single covalent bond.


 


IMPORTANT
A dot-and-cross diagram shows the arrangement of the electrons in the main energy levels. We
generally only show the outer energy level when we draw dot-and-cross diagrams. Remember that we


only draw the electrons as dots and crosses to show us which atoms the electrons come from.


 


When drawing the arrangement of electrons in a molecule:


‘dot’ for electrons from one of the atoms and a ‘cross’ for the electrons from the other atom
e if there are more than two types of atom, use additional symbols such as a small circle or a small


triangle


draw the outer electrons in pairs, to show the number of bond pairs and the number of lone pairs.


Some examples of dot-and-cross diagrams for simple covalently bonded molecules are shown in Figure 4.9.
hydrogen

two hydrogen hydrogen molecule
atoms (1) each hydrogen is now (2)


methane




H
four methane molecule: each
hydrogen atom hydrogen now shares two


(2,4) electrons with carbon
two water molecule: hydrogen and
hydrogen atom both fill their outer shells


(2,6) by sharing electrons




3



three molecule: hydrogen
and nitrogen both fill their


atoms(1) (2,5) shells by sharing electrons


e hydrogen chloride



hydrogen chlorine hydrogen chloride molecule:
atom hydrogen and chlorine both
(1) (2,8,7) fill their outer shells by


sharing electrons


 
f ethane
6 +2
six two
hydrogen ethane molecule:
atoms atoms each carbon atom fills their outer shell by


(1) (2,4) sharing electrons with one other carbon


atom and some hydrogen atoms
Figure 4.9: Dot-and-cross diagrams for some covalent compounds: a hydrogen, b methane, ¢ water, H20, d


ammonia, NH3, e hydrogen chloride, HCI and f ethane,


 
There are some cases in which the electrons around a central atom may not have a noble gas configuration


(an octet of electrons). For example:
boron trifluoride, BF3, has only six electrons around the boron atom. We say that the boron atom is


‘electron deficient’.
e sulfur hexafluoride, has twelve electrons around the central sulfur atom. We say that the sulfur


atom has an ‘expanded octet’ (Figure 4.10).
phosphorus(V) chloride, has 10 electrons around the central phosphorus atom. Phosphorus has
expanded its octet (Figure 4.10).

e sulfur dioxide, the sulfur atom forms a double bond with each oxygen atom. This leaves a pair of
non-bonding electrons on the sulfur atom. There are 10 electrons around the sulfur atom. Sulfur has
expanded its octet (Figure 4.10).


a_ boron trifluoride
F F
QF)



F
three boron boron trifluoride
fluorine (2,3) molecule


atoms (2,7)


hexafluoride


 
six sulfur sulfur hexafluoride
fluorine atom molecule


chloride, PCls
cl



cl
five phosphorus phosphorus(V)
chlorine (2,8,5) chloride


atoms (2,8,7) molecule


sulfur dioxide, SO2


>
sulfur sulfur
oxygen atom dioxide


atoms (2,6) molecule
Figure 4.10: Dot-and-cross diagrams for a boron trifluoride, BF3, b sulfur hexafluoride, ¢ phosphorus(V) chloride,


and d sulfur dioxide, SO2.


 
Some elements in Periods 15, 16 and 17 have more than 8 electrons in their outer shell when they form
compounds. According to one theory they use unfilled p-orbitals or d-orbitals in the third main energy level
for the extra electrons. Some common examples of this expansion of the octet are seen in compounds of


phosphorus, sulfur and chlorine with oxygen or fluorine.


Question
2 dot-and-cross diagrams for the following covalently bonded molecules. Show only the outer
electron shells. Note that in part d the beryllium atom is electron deficient and in part e the antimony

atom has an expanded octet.
CCl,
chloride


beryllium chloride,


pentafluoride,


Multiple covalent bonds
Some atoms can bond together by sharing two pairs of electrons. We call this a double covalent bond. A
double covalent bond is represented by a double line between the atoms: for example, O=O. The dot-
and-cross diagrams for oxygen, carbon dioxide and ethene, all of which have double covalent bonds, are


shown in Figure 4.11.
to form an oxygen molecule, each oxygen atom needs to gain two electrons to complete its


outer shell so two pairs of electrons are shared and two covalent bonds are formed.
For carbon dioxide, each oxygen atom needs to gain two electrons as before. But the carbon atom
needs to gain four electrons to complete its outer shell. So two oxygen atoms each form two bonds


with carbon, so that the carbon atom has eight electrons around it.
e In ethene, two hydrogen atoms share a pair of electrons with each carbon atom. This leaves each
carbon atom with two outer shell electrons for bonding with each other. A double bond is formed


between the two carbon atoms.
a Oxygen
two oxygen atoms oxygen molecule


(2,6)


b Carbon dioxide



two carbon carbon dioxide
atoms (2,6) atom (2,4) molecule


Ethene


 
four two ethene molecule
hydrogen carbon


atoms (2,4)


Figure 4.11: Dot-and-cross diagrams for a oxygen, O2, b carbon dioxide, and ¢ ethene,


 
Atoms can also bond together by sharing three pairs of electrons. We call this a triple covalent bond.


Figure 4.12 shows a dot-and-cross diagram for the triple-bonded nitrogen molecule.
In order to form a nitrogen molecule, each nitrogen atom needs to gain three electrons to complete its


outer shell. So three pairs of electrons are shared and three covalent bonds are formed.


Nitrogen
two nitrogen nitrogen molecule


atoms (2,5)

Figure 4.12: Dot-and-cross diagram for a nitrogen molecule,



Question
3 dot-and-cross diagrams for the following covalently bonded molecules. Show only the outer


electron shells:


carbonyl chloride


disulfide,


Co-ordinate bonding (dative covalent bonding)
A co-ordinate bond (or dative covalent bond) is formed when one atom provides both the electrons


needed for a covalent bond.


For dative covalent bonding we need:


one atom to have a lone pair of electrons
asecond atom to have an unfilled orbital to accept the lone pair. In other words, an electron-deficient


compound.
An example of this is the ammonium ion, formed when ammonia combines with a hydrogen ion, H*.
The hydrogen ion is electron deficient. It has space for two electrons in its shell. The nitrogen atom in the


ammonia molecule has a lone pair of electrons. The lone pair on the nitrogen atom provides both electrons
for the bond (Figure 4.13).


+
+
H


Figure 4.13: The formation of a co-ordinate bond in the ammonium ion.


 
In a displayed formula (which shows all atoms and bonds), a co-ordinate bond is represented by an arrow.


The head of the arrow points away from the lone pair that forms the bond.
Another molecule that has co-ordinate bonds is aluminium chloride. At high temperatures aluminium
chloride exists as molecules with the formula This molecule is electron deficient. It still needs two
electrons to complete the outer shell of the aluminium atom. At lower temperatures two molecules of
combine to form a molecule with the formula The molecules are able to combine because lone
pairs of electrons on two of the chlorine atoms form co-ordinate bonds with the aluminium atoms, as shown


in Figure 4.14.


 


Figure 4.14: A dot-and-cross diagram for an aluminium chloride molecule,


 


IMPORTANT
A displayed formula shows all of the atoms and all of the bonds. You do not have to show the correct


bond angles in a displayed formula.

 


Question
4 Draw dot-and-cross diagrams to show the formation of a co-ordinate bond between the following:
i boron trifluoride, BF3, and ammonia, NH3, to form the compound F3BNH3


PH3, and a hydrogen ion, H*, to form the ion PH,*.
Draw the displayed formulae of the products formed in part a. Show the co-ordinate bond by an


arrow.


Bond length and bond energy
In general, double bonds are shorter than single bonds. This is because double bonds have a greater
quantity of negative charge between the two atomic nuclei. The greater force of attraction between the
electrons and the nuclei pulls the atoms closer together. This results in a stronger bond. We measure the
strength of a bond by its bond energy. This is the energy needed to break one mole of a given covalent
bond in the gaseous state (see also Chapter 6). The distance from the nucleus of one atom to another
depends on the two atoms forming the bond. The internuclear distance between two covalently bonded


atoms is called the bond length. Table 4.1 shows some values of bond lengths and bond energies.


 


Table 4.1: Examples of values for bond energies and bond lengths.


 
Bond strength can influence the reactivity of a compound. The molecules in liquids and gases are in
random motion so they are constantly colliding with each other. A reaction only happens between
molecules when a collision occurs with enough energy to break bonds in either or both molecules. Nitrogen
is unreactive because it has a triple bond, NEN. It takes a lot of energy to break the nitrogen atoms apart.
The bond energy required is 994 Oxygen is much more reactive. Although it has a double bond, it
only takes 496 to break a mole of O=O bonds. However, bond strength is only one factor that influences
the reactivity of a molecule. The polarity of the bond (see Section 4.7) and whether the bond is a o bond
(sigma bond) or a m bond (pi bond) (see Section 4.5) both play a large part in determining chemical


reactivity.


Question


The table lists bond lengths and bond energies of some hydrogen halides.
Hydrogen halide Bond length /nm Bond energy /


 


Table 4.2: Information table for Question 5.

 
the relationship between the bond length and the bond energy for these hydrogen
halides.


b why the bond energy values decrease in the order HCI > HBr > HI.


Suggest a value for the bond length in hydrogen fluoride, HF.


4.4 Shapes of molecules


Valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR)
Because all electrons have the same (negative) charge, they repel each other when they are close
together. So, a pair of electrons in the bonds surrounding the central atom in a molecule will repel other


electron pairs. This repulsion forces the pairs of electrons apart until the repulsive forces are minimised.


The shape and bond angles of a covalently bonded molecule depend on:


the number of pairs of electrons around each atom


whether these pairs are lone pairs or bonding pairs.
IMPORTANT


VSEPR:
The valence shell electrons are the electrons in the main outer shell.
Pairs of electrons repel each other because they have the same charge.


A lone pair of electrons repel each other more than a bonded pair of electrons.
Repulsion between multiple and single bonds is treated the same as for repulsion between single


bonds. Repulsions between pairs of double bonds are greater.
The shape of a molecule can be deduced using this theory, with the most stable shape being that


which minimises the forces of repulsion.


 
Lone pairs of electrons have a more concentrated electron charge cloud than bonding pairs of electrons.
Their cloud charges are wider and slightly closer to the nucleus of the central atom. This results in a
different amount of repulsion between different types of electron pairs. The order of repulsion is lone pair-


lone pair (most repulsion) > lone pair-bond pair > bond pair-bond pair (least repulsion).
Figure 4.15 shows the repulsions between lone pairs (pink) and bonding pairs (white) in a water molecule.
reatest repulsion between lone pairs
P P


H—O-H angle is 104.5°


intermediate repulsion


 
H H


repulsion between bonding pairs


Figure 4.15: Repulsion between lone and bonding electron pairs in water.


 


Working out the shapes of molecules
The differences in electron-pair repulsion determine the shape and bond angles in a molecule. Figure 4.16
compares the shapes and bond angles of methane, ammonia and water. Space-filling models of these
molecules are shown in Figure 4.17. Each of these molecules has four pairs of electrons surrounding the
central atom. Note that in drawing three-dimensional diagrams, the triangular ‘wedge’ is the bond coming


towards you and the dashed black line is the bond going away from you.
Methane has four bonding pairs of electrons surrounding the central carbon atom. The equal repulsive
forces of each bonding pair of electrons results in a structure with all bond angles being 109.5°.


We call this a tetrahedral structure.
In ammonia and water, the tetrahedral arrangement of the electron pairs around the central atom

becomes distorted.
Ammonia has three bonding pairs of electrons and one lone pair. As lone pair-bond pair repulsion is



greater than bond pair-bond pair repulsion, the bonding pairs of electrons are pushed closer together.
This gives the ammonia molecule a pyramidal shape. The H-N-H bond angle is about 107°. We call


this a pyramidal structure.
Water has two bonding pairs of electrons and two lone pairs. The greatest force is between the two
lone pairs. This results in the bonds being pushed even closer together. The shape of the water


molecule is a non-linear V shape. The H-O-H bond angle is 104.5°.


  


 
a Methane
H
109.8" repulsions
equal
ij
H
b Ammonia
lone pair


greater
repulsion
107°


H
* intermediate

repulsion
€


H


Figure 4.16: The bond angles in a methane, b ammonia, and water depend on the type of electron-pair repulsion.


 


a Methane b Ammonia Water



Figure 4.17: Shapes of molecules. These space-filling models show the molecular shapes of a methane, b ammonia,


NH3, and c water, H20.


 


Question
6 a_ Predict, using VSEPR theory, the shapes of the following molecules, which you drew in question 2


in Section 4.3:
CCl,
chloride, BeCl,
chloride.
b dot-and-cross diagrams for the following molecules and then predict their shapes:


i hydrogen sulfide, H2S


ii PH3.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
Predict the shape and bond angles in a molecule of stibine, Explain how you arrived at your


conclusions.


Solution

Step 1: Use the Periodic Table to find to which groups the atoms belong.

Sb
Step 2: Deduce the number of electrons in the outer principal quantum shell.


Sb=5,H=1


Step 3: Draw a dot-and-cross diagram for the molecule.
In this case you should recognise the similarity to structure of ammonia. So there will


be 3 bonding pairs of electrons and 1 lone pair.


Step 4: Use VSEPR theory to work out approximate bond angles.
Repulsion between lone pair and bond pair electrons is greater than repulsions between
a bonding pair and a bonding pair. So for four pairs of electrons, the bond angle
is reduced from the tetrahedral bond angle to lower than 109.5° (the tetrahedral bond
angle). Any suitable value lower than about 107° (the value of ammonia is a suitable
estimate). But the value should be above 90°. (The actual value is 91.7°. The low value


is related to the large size of the Sb atom).


 


Step 5: Deduce the shape.


You should recognise the similarity with the shape of ammonia which is pyramidal.


 


More molecular shapes


We can work out the shapes of other molecules by following the rules for electron-pair repulsion.


Boron trifluoride
Boron trifluoride is an electron-deficient molecule. It has only six electrons in its outer shell. The three
bonding pairs of electrons repel each other equally, so the bond angles are 120° (Figure 4.18). We


describe the shape of the molecule as trigonal planar. Trigonal means having three angles.


Figure 4.18: Boron trifluoride.


 
Carbon dioxide


Carbon dioxide has two carbon-oxygen double bonds and no lone pairs. The four electrons in each double
bond repel other electrons in a similar way to the two electrons in a single bond (Figure 4.19). So, the


bond angle is 180°. We describe the shape of the carbon dioxide molecule as /inear.


Figure 4.19: Carbon dioxide.

 
Phosphorus pentafluoride



Phosphorus pentafluoride has five bonding pairs of electrons and no lone pairs. The repulsion between the
electron pairs results in the most stable structure being one where two pyramids with bases of three angles
are joined (Figure 4.20). We call this structure trigonal bipyramidal. Three of the fluorine atoms lie in the
same plane as the phosphorus atom. The bond angles F—P-F within this plane are 120°. Two of the fluorine


atoms lie above and below this plane, at 90° to it.



Figure 4.20: Phosphorus pentafluoride.


 


 


Sulfur hexafluoride
Sulfur hexafluoride has six bonding pairs of electrons and no lone pairs. The equal repulsion between the
electron pairs results in the structure shown in Figure 4.21. All bond angles are 90°. We describe the


shape as octahedral.


Figure 4.21: Sulfur hexafluoride.


 


Questions
7 Drawa dot-and-cross diagram for a molecule of selenium hexafluoride, A single selenium


atom has six electrons in its outer shell.


the shape of selenium hexafluoride.
c Draw the shape of the phosphorus(V) chloride molecule that you drew as a dot-and-cross diagram


in question 2 in Section 4.3.
trimethylamine, (CH3)3N: three CH3 groups are attached to the nitrogen by bonds. The

repulsion of the CH3 groups is slightly greater than the repulsion of the H atoms in ammonia.
Which one of these bond angles for the bond in trimethylamine, is correct?

about 90°


107°
C 109.5°


D


about 120°


4.5 o bonds and bonds
A single covalent bond is formed when two non-metal atoms combine. Each atom that combines has an
atomic orbital containing a single unpaired electron. In the formation of a covalent bond the atomic orbitals
overlap so that a combined orbital is formed, containing two electrons. We call this combined orbital a
molecular orbital. The amount of overlap of the atomic orbitals determines the strength of the bond: the
greater the overlap, the stronger the bond. Figure 4.22 shows how the s atomic orbitals of two hydrogen


atoms overlap to form a covalent bond.


IMPORTANT


Covalent bonds are formed when atomic orbitals overlap.


 



s atomic molecular orbital in a


orbitals hydrogen molecule


Figure 4.22: Two 1s atomic orbitals in hydrogen overlap to form a covalent bond.


 


The greater the overlap, the stronger the bond.
The mixing of atomic orbitals is called hybridisation. Mixing an s with three, two or one p-type orbitals


forms and sp hybrid orbitals.
Sigma bonds (o bonds) are formed from end-on overlap of atomic orbitals. Pi bonds (m bonds) are


formed from sideways overlap of atomic orbitals.
The p atomic orbitals can also overlap linearly (end-on) to form covalent bonds. When p orbitals are
involved in forming single bonds, they become modified to include some s orbital character. The orbital is
slightly altered in shape to make one of the lobes of the p orbital bigger. The process of mixing atomic


orbitals (for example, one s orbital and three p orbitals) in this way is called hybridisation. The hybrids are


called sp? hybrids. In sp? hybrids, each orbital has s character and p character. When one s orbital and
two p orbitals are hybridised, the hybrids are called sp? hybrids. When one s orbital and one p orbital are
hybridised, the hybrids are called sp orbitals. When hybridised orbitals overlap linearly (end-on) we call the


bond bond (sigma bond). Figure 4.23 shows the formation of o bonds.
+ are the nuclei of the atoms
orbital

modified p s atomic bond
atomic orbital, between
orbital, e.g. e.g. from CandH
from carbon hydrogen
orbital

modified p modified o bond
orbital, e.g. p orbital, e.g. between


from carbon from carbon


Figure 4.23: Bonds are formed by the linear (end-on) overlap of atomic orbitals.


 
The electron density of each o bond is symmetrical about a line joining the nuclei of the atoms forming the


bond.
Bonds formed by the sideways overlap of p orbitals are called m bonds (pi bonds). A m bond is not
symmetrical about the axes joining the nuclei of the atoms forming the bond. Figure 4.24 shows how an

bond is formed from two p orbitals overlapping sideways.
We often draw a single m bond as two electron clouds, one arising from each lobe of the p orbitals. You



must remember, though, that the two clouds of electrons in a m bond represent one bond consisting of a


total of two electrons.
> bond

This is an acceptable
p orbital way of writing the


orbital molecular orbital


forming the bond.


Figure 4.24: n bonds are formed by the sideways overlap of atomic orbitals.


 


The shape of some organic molecules
We can explain the shapes of molecules in terms of the patterns of electron density found in o bonds and n


bonds.


Ethane

The displayed formula for ethane is:




||


All the bonds in ethane are formed by linear overlap of atomic orbitals. They are all o bonds.
Figure 4.25 shows the electron density distribution in ethane formed by these o bonds. All the areas of


electron density repel each other equally. This makes the H-C-H bond angles all the same (109.5°).


bonds


 
H
109.5°

/
H H
© carbon nucleus
x hydrogen nucleus
Figure 4.25: The electron density distribution in ethane.
Ethene
The displayed formula for ethene is:




H
Each carbon atom in ethene uses three of its four outer electrons to form o bonds. Two o bonds are formed


with the hydrogen atoms and one o bond is formed with the other carbon atom.
The fourth electron from each carbon atom occupies a p orbital, which overlaps sideways with a similar p


orbital on the other carbon atom. This forms a m bond. Figure 4.26 shows how this occurs.


 
p orbitals bond
H H H H
120
H Ho


p orbitals bond


Figure 4.26: Overlap of p orbitals to produce a m bond in ethene.


 


The electron density distribution of both the o and m bonds in ethene is shown in Figure 4.27.


m bond


  


bond


x hydrogen nuclei


@ carbon nuclei


Figure 4.27: The electron density distribution in ethene.


 
Ethene is a planar molecule because this ensures the maximum overlap of the p orbitals that form the
bond. You will notice that the electron clouds that make up the bond lie above and below the plane of the
carbon and hydrogen nuclei. We would expect the bond angle in ethene to be about 120° because
the three areas of electron density of the o bonds are equally distributed. However, because of the position


of the m bond, this bond angle is actually 117°. This minimises the repulsive forces.


Triple bonds
In the nitrogen molecule, N=N, hydrogen cyanide, H-C=N and ethyne, H-C=C-H, there are triple bonds.
The triple bond is formed from two m bonds (pi bonds) and one o bond (sigma bond). The two bonds are


at right angles to each other.
In hydrogen cyanide one o bond is formed between the hydrogen atom and the carbon atom (by overlap of
an sp carbon hybrid orbital with the 1s hydrogen orbital). A second o bond is formed between the carbon
and the nitrogen atom (by overlap of an sp carbon hybrid orbital with a p orbital on the nitrogen). This


leaves the remaining p orbitals on each nitrogen atom to form two m bonds at right angles to each other.
1

2, 2 \
2


1


Figure 4.28: Overlap of two sets of p orbitals of nitrogen and carbon to produce two bonds in hydrogen cyanide.





4.6 Metallic bonding


What is a metallic bond?
In a metal, the atoms are packed closely together in a regular arrangement called a /attice. Metal atoms in
a lattice tend to lose their outer shell electrons and become positive ions. The outer shell electrons occupy
new energy levels and are free to move throughout the metal lattice. We call these electrons delocalised
electrons (mobile electrons). Delocalised electrons are electrons that are not associated with any one


particular atom or bond.
Metallic bonding is strong. This is because the ions are held together by the strong electrostatic
attraction between their positive charges and the negative charges of the delocalised electrons (Figures


4.29 and 4.30).


 


 


outer-shell electrons ‘sea’ of delocalised electrons
Figure 4.30: Metallic bonding: there are strong attractive forces between the positively charged ions and the delocalised


electrons.


 


This electrostatic attraction acts in all directions. The strength of metallic bonding increases with:
e increasing positive charge on the ions in the metal lattice
e decreasing size of metal ions in the lattice


increasing number of mobile electrons per atom.


Metallic bonding and the properties of metals
We can use our model of metallic bonding to explain many of the properties of metals.


Most metals have high melting points and high boiling points
It takes a lot of energy to weaken the strong attractive forces between the metal ions and the delocalised
electrons. These attractive forces can only be overcome at high temperatures. However, mercury is a liquid
at room temperature (Figure 4.31). This is because some of the electrons in a mercury atom are bound


more tightly than usual to the nucleus, weakening the metallic bonds between atoms.


 


Figure 4.31: Mercury is a liquid at room temperature.


 


Metals conduct electricity
When a voltage is applied to a piece of metal, an electric current flows in it because the delocalised
electrons (mobile electrons) are free to move. Metallic bonding is the only type of bonding that allows us to
predict reliably that a solid will conduct electricity. Covalent solids cannot conduct electricity because none
of their electrons are free to move throughout the structure, although graphite is an exception to this. lonic


solids cannot conduct because neither their electrons nor their ions are free to move from place to place.
Question
Answer the following, giving a full explanation in terms of metallic bonding.


why aluminium has a higher melting point than sodium.
The thermal conductivity of stainless steel is 82 W K-!. The thermal conductivity of copper is


400 W Why do some stainless steel saucepans have a copper base?


does aluminium conduct electricity better than sodium?

Metals conduct heat
The conduction of heat is partly due to the movement of the delocalised electrons but mainly due to the
vibrations passed on from one metal ion to the next.


4.7 Intermolecular forces
The forces within molecules due to covalent bonding are strong. However, the forces between molecules


are much weaker. We call these forces van der Waals’ forces (intermolecular forces).


There are two types of van der Waals’ (intermolecular) force:
instantaneous (temporary) dipole-induced dipole forces (id-id) forces. These are also called London
dispersion forces.


permanent dipole-permanent dipole (pd-pd) forces (including hydrogen bonding).
A special case of permanent dipole-permanent dipole forces is hydrogen bonding. This occurs between


molecules where hydrogen is bonded to a highly electronegative atom.


IMPORTANT
Remember that ‘van der Waals’ forces’ is a general term used for all intermolecular forces including id-


id forces, pd-pd forces and hydrogen bonding.


 


Table 4.2 compares the relative strength of these intermolecular forces and other bonds.


hydrogen bonding 20-50


 


Table 4.2: Strengths of different types of bond and intermolecular force.


 
In order to understand how intermolecular forces work, we first have to know about electronegativity and


bond polarity.


Electronegativity
Electronegativity is the power of a particular atom that is covalently bonded to another atom to attract the


bonding pair of electrons towards itself.
The greater the value of the electronegativity, the greater the power of an atom to attract the electrons in


a covalent bond towards itself. For Groups 1 to 17 the pattern of electronegativity is:

electronegativity increases across a period from Group 1 to Group 17

electronegativity increases up each group.


This means that fluorine is the most electronegative element.
For the most electronegative elements, the order of electronegativity is:


increasing electronegativit


Br<Cl<N<O<F
Carbon and hydrogen have electronegativities that are lower than those of most other non-metallic


elements.


 


Factors influencing electronegativity


The value of the electronegativity depends on:
nuclear charge: atoms in the same period with a greater (positive) nuclear charge are more likely to


attract the bonding pair of electrons.
atomic radius: atoms in the same group in which the outer electrons are further from the nucleus are
less likely to attract the bonding pair of electrons because the pull of the positive nucleus on the


electron pair is lower.
shielding: the greater the number of inner electron shells and sub-shells, the lower the effective


nuclear charge on the bonding electrons.


lonic or covalent?
The most commonly used scale of electronegativity values is called the Pauling electronegativity scale, Np.


Table 4.3 shows some Pauling electronegativity values.


 


Table 4.3: Some Pauling electronegativity values.


 


Note:
carbon (Np = 2.5) and hydrogen (Np = 2.1) have electronegativities that are lower than those of many
other non-metallic elements


Pauling electronegativity has no units.
Differences in electronegativity values can be used to predict whether a simple compound has ionic or


covalent bonds.


 
e If the electronegativity difference is high, e.g. 2.0 or more, the compound is likely to be ionic. E.g.


sodium chloride: Na = 0.9, Cl = 3.0. Difference = 2.1.
If the electronegativity difference is lower, e.g. below 1.0, the compound is likely to be covalent. E.g.


methane: C = 2.5, H = 2.1. Difference = 0.4.


value shows that there is no ionic character in the bond, e.g.


 


 


 
Some compounds are not entirely covalent and have some ionic character in them. These have


intermediate electronegativity differences, e.g. 1.0.


Polarity in molecules
When the electronegativity values of the two atoms forming a covalent bond are the same, the pair of
electrons is equally shared. We say that the covalent bond is non-polar. For example, hydrogen


chlorine and bromine are non-polar molecules.
When a covalent bond is formed between two atoms having different electronegativity values, the more


electronegative atom attracts the pair of electrons in the bond towards it.


As a result:
the centre of positive charge does not coincide with the centre of negative charge
we Say that the electron distribution is asymmetric


the two atoms are partially charged


we show:


e the less electronegative atom with the partial charge 6+ (‘delta positive’)
the more electronegative atom with the partial charge 6- (‘delta negative’)

we Say that the bond is polar (or that it has a dipole).
Figure 4.32 shows the polar bond in a hydrogen chloride molecule.



H——Cl


Figure 4.32: Hydrogen chloride is a polar molecule.


 
As the difference in electronegativity values of the atoms in a covalent bond increases, the bond becomes
more polar. The degree of polarity of a molecule is measured as a dipole moment. The direction of the
dipole is shown by the sign The arrow points to the partially negatively charged end of the


dipole.


In molecules containing more than two atoms, we have to take into account:


the polarity of each bond


the arrangement of the bonds in the molecule.
Trichloromethane, is a polar molecule. The three dipoles point in a similar direction. Their
combined effect is not cancelled out by the polarity of the bond. This is because the C-H bond is
virtually non-polar. The electron distribution is asymmetric. The molecule is polar, with the negative end


towards the chlorine atoms. This is shown in Figure 4.33a.
Some molecules contain polar bonds but have no overall polarity. This is because the polar bonds in these
molecules are arranged in such a fashion that the dipole moments cancel each other out. An example is
tetrachloromethane, CCl, (Figure 4.33b). Tetrachloromethane has four polar C—Cl bonds pointing towards
the four corners of a tetrahedron. The dipoles in each bond cancel each other, so tetrachloromethane is


non-polar.
5+ b cl


cI cl a
trichloromethane, tetrachloromethane,


a polar molecule molecule


Figure 4.33: The polarity of a trichloromethane and b tetrachloromethane.


 


IMPORTANT
Remember that not all molecules with polar bonds are polar molecules. Sometimes the polar bonds


cancel each other out because the same types of bonds have dipoles ‘pulling’ in opposite directions.


 
We can determine the charge distribution in molecules and ions by a method called X-ray spectroscopy.
One method involves firing X-rays at molecules and measuring the energy of the electrons given off. Using
this method, scientists have found that in a sulfate ion, the sulfur atom has a charge of +1.12 units and the


four oxygen atoms each have a charge of -0.78 units.


Question
10 Are the following molecules polar or non-polar? In each case give a reason for your answer.
(Electronegativity values: F = 4.0, Cl = 3.0, Br = 2.8, S = 2.5, C = 2.5, H = 2.1)
chlorine,
b fluoride, HF
c V-shaped molecule, sulfur dichloride,


the tetrahedral molecule, chloromethane,


e tetrahedral molecule, tetrabromomethane,


Polarity and chemical reactivity
Bond polarity influences chemical reactivity. For example, both nitrogen, N=N, and carbon monoxide, C=O,
have triple bonds requiring a similar amount of energy to break them. Nitrogen is a non-polar molecule and
is fairly unreactive. But carbon monoxide is a polar molecule, and this explains its reactivity with oxygen
and its use as a reducing agent. Many chemical reactions are started by a reagent attacking one of the
electrically charged ends of a polar molecule. For example, chloroethane, is far more reactive than
ethane, This is because reagents such as ions can attack the delta-positive carbon atom of the


polarised bond (see also Section 16.2).

H

H
|




H H
Such an attack is not possible with ethane because the C-H bond is virtually non-polar. This helps to


explain why alkanes such as ethane are not very reactive.


Instantaneous dipole-induced dipole (id-id) forces
Noble gases such as neon and argon exist as isolated atoms. Noble gases can be liquefied, but at very low
temperatures, so there must be very weak forces of attraction between their atoms. These weak forces


keep the atoms together in the liquid state.
Bromine is a non-polar molecule that is liquid at room temperature. The weak forces of attraction are
keeping the bromine molecules together at room temperature. These very weak forces of attraction are
called instantaneous dipole-induced dipole (id-id) forces, or London dispersion forces. These forces exist


between all atoms or molecules. So, how do these forces arise?
The electron charge clouds in a non-polar molecule (or atom) are constantly moving. It often happens that
more of the charge cloud is on one side of the molecule than the other. This means that one end of the
molecule has, for a short time, more negative charge than the other. A temporary dipole is set up. This
dipole can set up (induce) a dipole on neighbouring molecules. As a result of this, there are forces of
attraction between the 5+ end of the dipole in one molecule and the end of the dipole in a neighbouring
molecule (Figure 4.34). These dipoles are always temporary because the electrons clouds are always
moving. Instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces are sometimes called temporary dipole-induced


dipole forces.


Instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces increase with:


increasing number of electrons (and protons) in the molecule
increasing the number of contact points between the molecules: contact points are places where the

molecules come close together.
Differences in the size of the instantaneous dipole-induced dipole (id-id) forces can be used to explain the
trend in the enthalpy change of vaporisation and boiling points of the noble gases. Figure 4.35 shows how
these vary with the number of electrons present. (The enthalpy change of vaporisation is the energy
required to convert a mole of liquid into a mole of gas.)



electron movements atom without
result in temporary dipole

dipole

& as atoms


approach each
repulsion other, the dipole


on one atom
attraction induces a dipole


on another


Figure 4.34: How instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces arise.


 
N


 


Enthalpy of vaporisation / kJ mol!
0 20 40 60


Number of electrons


-100 Xe


-200


Boiling point / °C


  
-270


0 20 40 60


Number of electrons
Figure 4.35: a Enthalpy changes of vaporisation and b boiling points of the noble gases plotted against the number of


electrons present.


 
You can see that both the enthalpy change of vaporisation and the boiling points of the noble gases
increase as the number of electrons increases (Figure 4.35). This is because the id-id forces between the
atoms are increased with an increasing number of electrons. So, more energy is needed to change the


liquid into vapour and the boiling point is higher.
The effect of increasing the number of contact points can be seen by comparing the boiling points of
pentane (boiling point 36 °C) and 2,2-dimethylpropane (boiling point 10 °C) (Figure 4.36). These


compounds have equal numbers of electrons in their molecules.
The molecules in pentane can line up beside each other so there is a large number of contact points. The
id-id forces are higher, so the boiling point is higher. The molecules of 2,2-dimethylpropane are more
compact. The surface area available for coming into contact with neighbouring molecules is smaller. The


id-id forces are relatively lower, so the boiling point is lower.
The id-id forces between individual atoms are very small. However, the total id-id forces between very long


non-polar molecules such as poly(ethene) molecules (see Section 15.5) can be much larger. That is why


poly(ethene) is a solid at room temperature.
contact points
CH CH CH3 CH3
z \

CH; CH;
pentane, 2,2-dimethylpropane,


boiling point 36°C boiling point 10°C
Figure 4.36: The difference in boiling points of pentane and 2,2-dimethylpropane can be explained by the strength of the


instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces.


 
Two types of poly(ethene) are low-density poly(ethene), LDPE, and high-density poly(ethene), HDPE. Both


have crystalline and non-crystalline regions in them (Figure 4.37).
Y



(< region


Figure 4.37: Crystalline and non-crystalline regions in poly(ethene).


 
HDPE has more crystalline regions where the molecules are closer together than LDPE. The total id-id


forces are greater, so HDPE is the stronger of the two.
Question
11 points of the halogens are:
fluorine =188 °C chlorine
bromine iodine +184 °C
i Describe the trend in these boiling points going down Group 17.


ii Explain the trend in these boiling points.
The table lists the formulae and boiling points of some alkanes. Explain the trend in terms of


instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces.


Structural formula Boiling point / °C


 

Permanent dipole-permanent dipole (pd-pd) forces
In some molecules, the dipole is permanent. Molecules with a permanent dipole are called polar molecules.



A fine jet of polar molecules will be attracted towards an electrically charged plastic rod or comb. (The rod


can be charged by rubbing it with a woollen cloth.) Figure 4.38 shows the result of this experiment.


 


Figure 4.38: The deflection of water by an electrically charged nylon comb.


 
The molecules are always attracted to the charged rod, whether the rod is positively or negatively charged.


This is because the molecules have both negatively and positively charged ends.
The forces between two molecules having permanent dipoles are called permanent dipole-permanent
dipole (pd-pd) forces. The attractive force between the 5+ charge on one molecule and the 6- charge on


a neighbouring molecule causes a weak attractive force between the molecules (Figure 4.39).
weak permanent

dipole-permanent dipole force




Figure 4.39: Permanent dipole-permanent dipole forces in propanone.


 
For small molecules with the same number of electrons, permanent dipole-permanent dipole forces are
often stronger than instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces. For example, propanone (CH3COCH3, M, =
58) has a higher boiling point than butane M, = 58). This means that more energy is
needed to break the intermolecular forces between propanone molecules than between butane molecules)


(Figure 4.40).

CH3

CH3
butane, propanone,


boiling point 0°C boiling point 56°C
Figure 4.40: The difference in the boiling points of propanone and butane can be explained by the different types of


intermolecular force between the molecules.


 
The permanent dipole-permanent dipole forces between propanone molecules are strong enough to make
this substance a liquid at room temperature. There are only instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces


between butane molecules. These forces are comparatively weak, so butane is a gas at room temperature.


Question
12 Bromine, Brz, and iodine monochloride, ICI, have the same number of electrons. But the boiling point


of iodine monochloride is nearly 40 °C higher than the boiling point of bromine. Explain this difference.


4.8 Hydrogen bonding
Note: Learners are only expected to describe hydrogen bonding in relation to molecules containing


and O-H. The material in this section relating to the F—H group is extension material, and is not on the


syllabus.


 
Hydrogen bonding is the strongest form of intermolecular bonding. It is a type of permanent dipole-


permanent dipole bonding.


For hydrogen bonding to occur between two molecules we need:
one molecule to have a hydrogen atom covalently bonded to F, O or N (the three most electronegative


atoms)
asecond molecule to have an F, O or N atom with an available lone pair of electrons.


For hydrogen bonding to happen the molecules must have:
covalently bonded to a highly electronegative atom, e.g. N, O or F
another highly electronegative atom with a lone pair of electrons.


When a hydrogen atom is covalently bonded to a very electronegative atom, the bond is very highly
polarised. The 6+ charge on the hydrogen atom is high enough for a bond to be formed with a lone pair of


electrons on the F, O or N atom of a neighbouring molecule (Figure 4.41).




H H




H


Figure 4.41: Hydrogen bonding between two ammonia molecules. A hydrogen bond is represented by a line of dots.


 
The force of attraction is about one-tenth of the strength of a normal covalent bond. For maximum bond
strength, the angle between the covalent bond to the hydrogen atom and the hydrogen bond is usually


180°.


The average number of hydrogen bonds formed per molecule depends on:


the number of hydrogen atoms attached to F, O or N in the molecule


the number of lone pairs present on the F, O or N.
Water has two hydrogen atoms and two lone pairs per molecule (Figure 4.42). So water is extensively

hydrogen bonded with other water molecules. It has an average of two hydrogen bonds per molecule.
+






Qa


Figure 4.42: Water can form, on average, two hydrogen bonds per molecule.


 
Ammonia is less extensively hydrogen bonded than water (see Figure 4.41). It can form, on average, only
one hydrogen bond per molecule. Although each ammonia molecule has three hydrogen atoms attached to


the nitrogen atom, it has only one lone pair of electrons that can be involved in hydrogen bond formation.

 
Take an A4 sheet of paper and divide it into two columns. In the left-hand column write down, one



under another, the key words, phrases and definitions that you have come across in this chapter in


any order. There are at least 15! Do this without looking at the book.
Work with another learner:
Ask another learner to define the first term that you have chosen.


Write the definition next to the term in the second column.
c After each turn, check your explanation or definition with that given in the book and rewrite if


necessary.


Take it in turns to ask each other to explain the terms or give definitions.


How many of these key words, phrases and definitions did you know before studying this chapter?


 


Questions


Note: Questions 13 c and 14 are extension material
13 Draw diagrams to show hydrogen bonding between the following molecules:
ethanol, and water
b and water


hydrogen fluoride molecules.


14 The boiling points of the hydrogen halides are shown in the table.


Hydrogen halide


 


Boiling point / °C


Table 4.4: Information table for Question 14.


 


Explain the trend in boiling points from HCI to HI.


why the boiling point of HF is so much higher than the boiling point of HCl.


How does hydrogen bonding affect boiling point?
Some compounds have higher boiling points than expected. This can be due to hydrogen bonding. Figure
4.43 shows a graph of the boiling points of the hydrogen halides, HF, HCI, HBr and HI, plotted against the


position of the halogen in the Periodic Table.


+50 4


Boiling point / °C


 


HF HCl HBr HI


Figure 4.43: The boiling points of the hydrogen halides.


 
The rise in boiling point from HCl to HI is due to the increasing number of electrons in the halogen atoms as
we go down the group. This leads to increased instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces as the molecules


get bigger. If hydrogen fluoride only had instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces between its molecules,
we would expect its boiling point to be about -90 °C. However, the boiling point of hydrogen fluoride is +20
°C, which is much higher. This is because of the stronger intermolecular forces of hydrogen bonding


between the HF molecules.


Question


The table lists the boiling points of some Group 15 hydrides.


 


Table 4.5: Information table for Question 15.


 


the trend in the boiling points from phosphine to stibine.


b why the boiling point of ammonia does not follow this trend.


The peculiar properties of water


Enthalpy change of vaporisation and boiling point
Water has a much higher enthalpy change of vaporisation and boiling point than expected. This is due to
its extensive hydrogen bonding. Figure 4.44 shows the enthalpy changes of vaporisation of water and other


Group 16 hydrides.
The rise in enthalpy change of vaporisation from H2S to is due to the increasing number of electrons
in the Group 16 atoms as we go down the group. This leads to increased instantaneous dipole-induced
dipole forces as the molecules get bigger. If water only had instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces
between its molecules, we would expect its enthalpy change to be about 17 kJ But the enthalpy
change of vaporisation of water is much higher. This is because water is extensively hydrogen bonded. The
boiling point of water is also much higher than predicted by the trend in boiling points for the other Group
16 hydrides. This also indicates that we need much more energy to break the bonds between water


molecules compared with other hydrides of Group 16 elements.


505


H20





Enthalpy change of
vaporisation /
w



n


 


 
|
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140


Number of electrons


Figure 4.44: Enthalpy changes of vaporisation for Group 16 hydrides plotted against number of electrons present.


 

Surface tension and viscosity
Water has a high surface tension and high viscosity.



Hydrogen bonding reduces the ability of water molecules to slide over each other, so the viscosity of water
is high. The hydrogen bonds in water also exert a significant downward force at the surface of the liquid.


This causes the surface tension of water to be higher than for most liquids.


Ice is less dense than water
Most solids are denser than their liquids. This is because the molecules are more closely packed in the solid
state. But this is not true of water. In ice, there is a three-dimensional hydrogen-bonded network of water
molecules. This produces a rigid lattice in which each oxygen atom is surrounded by a tetrahedron of
hydrogen atoms. This ‘more open’ arrangement, due to the relatively long bond lengths of the hydrogen
bonds, allows the water molecules to be slightly further apart than in the liquid (Figures 4.45 and 4.46). So


the density of ice is less than that of liquid water.


 


Figure 4.45: Ice floats on water.


 


 
Figure 4.46: A model of ice. Oxygen atoms are red, hydrogen atoms are white, hydrogen bonds are lilac. This hydrogen-


bonded arrangement makes ice less dense than water.

 


Question
16 Which pair of liquids when mixed has the strongest van der Waals’ forces?
and
and H3C-O-H
and


D


and
4.9 Bonding and physical properties


The type of bonding between atoms, ions or molecules influences the physical properties of a substance.


IMPORTANT


Giant structures such as ionic structures, metals and carbon (graphite and diamond) generally have
high melting points but this does not give evidence about the type of bonding. If a substance has a low
melting point, it is a better indication that the bonding is covalent within the molecule and there are


weak van der Waals’ forces of attraction between the molecules (intermolecular forces).


 


Physical state at room temperature and pressure
lonic compounds


lonic compounds are solids at room temperature and pressure. This is because:


there are strong electrostatic forces (ionic bonds) holding the positive and negative ions together
the ions are regularly arranged in a lattice (see Chapter 5), with the oppositely charged ions close to


each other.
lonic compounds have high melting points, high boiling points and high enthalpy changes of vaporisation.


It takes a lot of energy to overcome the strong electrostatic attractive forces.
Metals


Metals, apart from mercury, are solids. Many metals have high melting points, high boiling points and high
enthalpy changes of vaporisation. This is because it takes a lot of energy to overcome the strong attractive


forces between the positive ions and the ‘sea’ of delocalised electrons.


IMPORTANT
Remember that not all metals have high melting points. Group 1 metals and mercury have lower
boiling points than some non-metals, so do not use high melting point as a characteristic of metals


unless you are only referring to transition elements.


 


Covalent compounds
Covalently bonded substances with simple molecular structures, for example, water and ammonia, are
usually liquids or gases. This is because the intermolecular forces are weak. It does not take much energy
to overcome these intermolecular forces. So these substances have low melting points, low boiling points
and low enthalpy changes of vaporisation compared with ionic compounds. Some substances that have
covalently bonded molecules may be solids at room temperature: for example, iodine and poly(ethene).
These are usually molecules where the total instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces are considerable.
However, the melting points of these substances are still fairly low compared with ionic compounds or most


metals.


Solubility

lonic compounds
Most ionic compounds are soluble in water. This is because water molecules are polar and they are
attracted to the ions on the surface of the ionic solid. These attractions are called ion-dipole attractions
(see Section 19.4). These attractions replace the electrostatic forces between the ions and so the ions go
into solution.


Metals
Metals do not dissolve in water. The force of attraction between the ions and the delocalised electrons is
too great for water molecules to disrupt the structure and form bonds with the ions. However, some


metals, for example sodium and calcium, react with water rather than dissolving in water.

Covalent compounds

Covalently bonded substances with simple molecular structures fall into two groups.
Those that are insoluble in water. Most covalently bonded molecules are non-polar. Water molecules


are not attracted to them so they are insoluble. An example is iodine.
Those that are soluble in water. Small molecules that can form hydrogen bonds with water are


generally soluble. An example is ethanol,
Some covalently bonded substances react with water rather than dissolving in it. For example, hydrogen
chloride reacts with water to form hydrogen ions and chloride ions, and the ions are soluble. Silicon
chloride reacts with water to form hydrogen ions, chloride ions and silicon dioxide. This reaction is called a


hydrolysis reaction.


Electrical conductivity


IMPORTANT
Remember that electrical conductivity in molten or aqueous ionic compounds is due to mobile ions.


Electrical conductivity in metals is due to mobile electrons.

 

lonic compounds
lonic compounds do not conduct electricity when in the solid state. This is because the ions are fixed in the
lattice and can only vibrate around a fixed point. When molten, an ionic compound conducts electricity

because the ions are mobile.

Metals
Metals conduct electricity both when solid and when molten. This is because the delocalised electrons


move throughout the structure when a voltage is applied.


Covalent compounds
Covalently bonded substances with simple molecular structures do not conduct electricity. This is because


they have neither ions nor electrons that are mobile.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 4.1


 


lonic, covalent or metallic?
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
You are given several solid substances and have to decide whether the bonding is ionic, covalent or


metallic. Carry out these investigations and record your observations.


Procedure
Set up an electrical circuit containing batteries, connecting leads, a lamp (bulb) and crocodile


clips. This may already be set up for you.


2 Place one of the solids between the crocodile clips. Does the lamp (bulb) light?


amount of the solid to 20 cm? of water in a beaker and stir with a glass rod.


Does the solid dissolve? If the solid dissolves, keep the solution.


Dip aclean conductivity probe into the solution from step 3. Does the solution conduct electricity?


Which solids are ionic, which are covalent and which are metallic? Explain your answers.


 


Question


Explain the following differences in terms of the type of bonding present.
oxide has a melting point of 2980 °C but aluminium chloride changes to a vapour at


L78 °C,


b chloride conducts electricity when molten but not when solid.
conducts electricity when solid but the ionic solid chloride does not conduct when


solid.
sulfate dissolves in water but sulfur does not.


is soluble in water but propane, is not.


f of hydrogen chloride in water conducts electricity.


REFLECTION


Work with another learner to make a mind map (spider diagram) of the different types of bonding that
you have learned about in this chapter. On your mind map include information about how different
types of bonding affect the physical properties of substances. Reflect on any ideas you both might

have on how you could improve your mind map.



SUMMARY
lonic bonding is the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged ions. Covalent bonding is the electrostatic


attraction between the nuclei of two atoms and a shared pair of electrons.
Electronegativity is the power of a particular atom that is covalently bonded to another atom to attract the bonding


pair of electrons towards itself.
Bond energy is the energy required to break one mole of a particular covalent bond in the gaseous state. The units


of bond energy are kilojoules per mole,
The bond angles within molecules and the shapes of molecules can be predicted by VSEPR theory (lone pairs of

electrons repel each other more than bonding pairs of electrons).


Bonding can be described in terms of hybridisation of atomic orbitals and sigma bonds and pi (m) bonds.
Van der Waals’ forces can be classified as instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces (very weak), permanent
dipole-permanent dipole forces (slightly stronger) and hydrogen bonding (the strongest). Van der Waals’ forces are


weaker than covalent, ionic or metallic bonding.


Metallic bonding is the electrostatic attraction between positive ions and delocalised electrons.
Some of the physical properties of ionic, simple covalent molecules and metals can be related to the type of


bonding present.


 


E QUESTIO


 


table shows the atomic number and boiling points of some noble gases.


 



ideas about forces between atoms to explain this trend in boiling points.
b forms a number of covalently bonded compounds with fluorine.
the term covalent bond.
ii Draw a dot-and-cross diagram for xenon tetrafluoride, XeF,
iii Suggest a shape for XeF,. Explain your answer.
structure of xenon trioxide is shown below.




[2]


i By referring to electron pairs, explain why xenon trioxide has this shape.
ii Draw the structure of xenon trioxide to show the partial charges on the atoms and [2]


the direction of the dipole in the molecule.
Total: 11


chloride, and ammonia, NH3, are both covalent molecules.


aii Draw a diagram of an ammonia molecule, showing its shape. Show any lone pairs of [3]
electrons.

" the bond angle in the ammonia molecule.
[2]
b why ammonia is a polar molecule.
Anammonia molecule and an aluminium chloride molecule can join together by forming
a co-ordinate bond.
1
i Explain how a co-ordinate bond is formed.
ii Draw a dot-and-cross diagram to show the bonding in the compound formed
between ammonia and aluminium chloride, H3NAICI3. (Use * for a nitrogen electron,
[3]
for an aluminium electron and x for the hydrogen and chlorine electrons.)
Aluminium chloride molecules join together to form a compound with the formula
Draw a displayed formula (showing all atoms and bonds) to show the bonding in one
molecule.
2
Show the dative covalent bonds by arrows.
A [Total: 12]
values can be used to predict the polarity of bonds.
2
Define the term electronegativity.
electronegativity values for some atoms are given below:
H = 2.1, C = 2.5, F = 4.0, Cl =
Use these values to predict the polarity of each of the following bonds by copying the
bonded atoms shown below and adding 6+ or 5— above each atom.

[1]
i H-I


4
ii



shape of iodine trichloride, is shown below.




cl
i Use the electronegativity values above to explain how you know that iodine


trichloride is a covalent compound.
ii Describe the shape of this molecule.
why the molecule has this shape.
Suggest a value for the bond angle.
CClq, is a non-polar molecule.


i Draw a diagram to show the shape of this molecule.


ii Explain why this molecule is non-polar.
[1]


[1]
[2]
[2]
[2]


[1]
[2]


[1]


[Total: 15]


The diagram below shows part of a giant metallic structure.



@


e e e
this diagram to explain the main features of metallic bonding.
Explain why metals are good conductors of electricity.


Explain why, in general, metals have high melting points.


d why potassium is a better conductor of electricity than lithium.
[3]
[2]
[2]


[4]


[Total: 11]
Methane, is a gas at room temperature.


why methane is a gas at room temperature.
a diagram to show the shape of a molecule of methane. On your diagram show a


value for the HCH bond angle.


Perfumes often contain molecules that have simple molecular structures. Explain why.
When a negatively charged rod is held next to a stream of propanone, the


stream of propanone is attracted to the rod.
Draw the full structure of a molecule of propanone and use your diagram to explain why


the stream of propanone is attracted to the rod.


[2]
[3]


[2]


[3]


[Total: 10]
Sodium iodide and magnesium oxide are ionic compounds. lodine and oxygen are


covalent molecules.
dot-and-cross diagrams for:
i magnesium oxide


ii oxygen
how sodium iodide and iodine differ in their solubility in water. Explain your


answer.

Explain why molten sodium iodide conducts electricity but molten iodine does not.
boiling point of sodium iodide is 1304 °C. The boiling point of iodine is 184 °C.


Explain this difference.
Pauling electronegativities of Na and iodine are shown.


sodium = 0.9, iodine = 2.5
Use these electronegativity values to explain why sodium iodide is an ionic compound


and not a covalent compound.
[1]


[1]


[3]
[2]


[5]


[2]


[Total: 14]
Hydrogen sulfide, H2S, is a covalent compound.


a dot-and-cross diagram for hydrogen sulfide.
a diagram of a hydrogen sulfide molecule to show its shape. Show on your

diagram:

i the value of the HSH bond angle


ii the partial charges on each atom as 6+ or 6-
an arrow showing the exact direction of the dipole in the molecule as a whole.


Oxygen, O, sulfur, S, and selenium, Se, are in the same group in the Periodic Table.
i Explain why hydrogen selenide, has a higher boiling point than hydrogen


sulfide, H2S.
ii Explain why the boiling point of water is so much higher than the boiling point of


hydrogen sulfide.


[2]
[2]
[1]


[1]


[2]


[5]


[Total: 13]


The table shows the type of bonding in a number of elements and compounds.


Element or compound Type of bonding


 


Draw a labelled diagram to show metallic bonding.
b why magnesium chloride has a high melting point but bromine has a low melting


point.
Explain why solid sodium conducts electricity but solid sodium chloride does not conduct


electricity.
i Draw a dot-and-cross diagram for carbon dioxide.
ii Describe the shape of the carbon dioxide molecule.


Explain why a carbon dioxide molecule has this shape.
e is a liquid at room temperature. Weak instantaneous dipole-induced dipole


forces hold the bromine molecules together. Describe how these forces arise.


[2]


[5]
[2]
[1]
[1]


[2]


[5]


[Total: 18]
is extensively hydrogen bonded. This gives it anomalous (peculiar)


properties.
i Explain why ice is less dense than liquid water.


ii two other anomalous properties of water.

has the structure shown below.
[3]
[2]


 


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to

section... more work there move on
define electronegativity and explain the factors influencing the 47
electronegativity values of the elements
explain the trends in electronegativity across a period and 47
down a group in the Periodic Table


use differences in the Pauling electronegativity values to
47


predict if a compound has ionic or covalent bonds
define ionic bonding and describe ion bonding in
sodium chloride
4.2
b oxide


fluoride
define covalent bonding and describe covalent bonding in
hydrogen
oxygen
nitrogen
chlorine
hydrogen chloride 4.3
carbon dioxide
ammonia
methane
ethane

ethene
describe how some atoms in Period 3 can expand their octet of
electrons to form compounds such as sulfur dioxide, 4.3

phosphorus pentachloride and sulfur hexafluoride
describe co-ordinate bonding (dative covalent bonding) in ions 43
such as and molecules such as

use dot-and-cross diagrams to show the arrangement of
electrons in compounds with ionic, covalent and co-ordinate 4.3


bonding
describe covalent bonding in terms of orbital overlap giving 45


sigma and pi (m) bonds
describe how sigma and pi bonds form in

4.5
describe hybridisation of atomic orbitals to form sp, sp? and 45
sp? orbitals


define the terms bond energy and bond length and use these

to compare the reactions of covalent molecules
using ‘valence shell electron pair repulsion’ (VSEPR) theory,

describe and explain the shapes and bond angles in:

BF3

CO2



NH3




PFs






predict the shapes and bond angles in other molecules and 4.4

ions similar to those above

explain, in terms of hydrogen bonding, the unusual properties
of water (relatively low density of ice, relatively high melting 4.8

point, relatively high surface tension)
describe and understand the different types of intermolecular


forces (van der Waals’ forces) as either instantaneous dipoles


or permanent dipoles
describe the relative bond strengths of ionic, covalent and 49


metallic bonds compared with intermolecular forces.


 


images


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START
Describe the states of matter (solids, liquids and gases) in terms of the proximity (closeness),
arrangement and motion of particles. Compare your answers with those of another learner. How


well did they compare?
How does the volume of a gas change when the temperature is changed at constant pressure and
the pressure is changed at constant temperature? Discuss with another learner the reasons for


these changes, using ideas about moving particles.
Draw a diagram of a giant covalent structure such as diamond or graphite. Compare your drawing


with one in a textbook. How could your drawing be improved?
Discuss these questions with another learner.
Why does diamond have a very high melting point but sulfur has a low melting point?
Why does graphite conduct electricity but diamond does not?
Explain how metals are able to conduct electricity.
Use your knowledge of the structure of metals to explain why metals are malleable.
Be prepared to share your ideas with the rest of the class.


Try this problem by yourself and then discuss with another learner.
A substance, Y, is soluble in water. Y does not conduct electricity either when solid or in solution. Y


has a melting point of 185°C.


Describe the structure and bonding in Y, giving reasons for your answer.
Phosphorus has a simple molecular structure. Work with another learner to make a list of the


physical properties of phosphorus.


LIQUID CRYSTALS: THE FOURTH STATE OF MATTER?


 


Figure 5.1: A liquid crystal display in action in a mobile phone.


 
Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) in mobile phones and computers are now part of everyday life (Figure


5.1). But how do they work?
When you heat crystals of cholesteryl benzoate to 147 °C, they melt to form a cloudy liquid. At 180 °C
the liquid becomes transparent. The cloudy state between the liquid and solid is called a liquid crystal
metaphase. Many substances with rod-shaped molecules form a metaphase. In the metaphase, the


molecules can move slightly. They have lost their regular arrangement but there is still some structure.
For example, they point in about the same direction or are twisted into a helix. The direction in which


the molecules face can be changed by small electric fields.
LCDs have a thin film of liquid crystal between two transparent plates. The plates are treated
chemically so that the liquid crystals arrange themselves in a particular way. The plates have an
electrically conducting coating on their inner surface. Light that enters the display unit goes through a
polariser, which makes the light vibrate in one plane. When the polarised light passes through the
liquid crystal it turns through 90°. The light then passes through a second polariser set at 90° to the


first. The display unit appears bright (Figure 5.2).
  
 
   
  


 
  
   


  
light vibrating
in all directions
polariser —_
_ transparent plane of
plate polarisation
not twisted
crystal plane of polarised
molecules light twisted 90° liquid crystal
in twisted molecules


arrangement \, transparent plate in regular



_ 2nd
bright dark


(voltage off) (voltage on)


Figure 5.2: The bright and dark states of a liquid crystal (LCD) display.


 
When you apply a small voltage. the direction of the molecules changes so they no longer rotate in the


plane of the polarised light. The unit appears dark.
When the voltage is switched off the molecules go back to their original arrangement. By making the
conductive layer as separate small areas any pattern can be displayed and switched on or off by a


small voltage.


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
Compare the structures of a metaphase with a liquid and a solid. Is a metaphase another state of


matter or not?
How many hours a day do you spend looking at LCD screens (phone, computer, etc)? Do you think
this is good for you or not? Why do some people think that too much time spent on looking mobile

phone screens is a bad thing?





5.1 States of matter

Gases have no fixed shape or volume.

Gas particles:

are far apart, therefore gases can be compressed

are randomly arranged
can move freely from place to place, in all directions.

Liquids take the shape of the container they occupy.

Liquid particles:
are close together, so liquids have a fixed volume and can only be compressed slightly

are mostly arranged randomly
have limited movement from place to place, in all directions.

Solids have a fixed shape and volume.


Solid particles:


are touching each other, so solids cannot be compressed


are usually in a regular arrangement

cannot change positions with each other: they can only vibrate.


Question
the changes that occur in the closeness and motion of the particles when:
changes to a liquid

liquid changes to a gas.
The state of a substance at room temperature and pressure depends on its structure and bonding. Four

types of structure are found in elements and compounds:

simple molecular or simple atomic, e.g. carbon dioxide, argon

giant ionic, e.g. sodium chloride

giant metallic, e.g. iron, copper


giant molecular, e.g. silicon(IV) oxide.


The simple atomic structures found in the noble gases generally have similar physical properties to simple
molecular gases. Although noble gases exist as isolated atoms, they can be thought of as having a


molecular structure.


5.2 The gaseous state


The kinetic theory of gases
The idea that molecules in gases are in constant movement is called the kinetic theory of gases. This
theory makes certain assumptions:


the gas molecules move rapidly and randomly
e the distance between the gas molecules is much greater than the diameter of the molecules, so the


volume of the molecules is negligible (hardly any volume).


there are no intermolecular forces of attraction or repulsion between the molecules
all collisions between particles are elastic: this means no kinetic energy is lost in collisions (kinetic


energy is the energy associated with moving particles)


the temperature of the gas is related to the average kinetic energy of the molecules.
A theoretical gas that fits this description is called an ideal gas. In reality, the gases you are learning
about don’t fit this description exactly, although they may come very close. We call these gases real


gases.
Noble gases with small atoms, such as helium and neon, come close to ideal gas behaviour. This is because


the intermolecular forces are so small.


Question


Explain why the intermolecular forces in a sample of helium and neon are very small.


IMPORTANT


 


Ideal gases have zero particle volume and no intermolecular forces of attraction.
Ideal gases


The volume that a gas occupies depends on:


its pressure; we measure pressure in pascals, Pa


its temperature; we measure temperatures of gases in kelvin, K.
The kelvin temperature equals the Celsius temperature plus 273. For example, 100 °C is 100 + 273 = 373

K.


Question
Convert the following temperatures into the kelvin temperature:
i 245 °C


ii


b many pascals are there in 15 kPa?


IMPORTANT


The pressure of a gas is due to collisions between the gas molecules and the walls of the container.

 
Gases in a container exert a pressure. This is because the gas molecules are constantly hitting the walls of
the container. If we decrease the volume of a gas (at constant temperature) the molecules are squashed


closer together and hit the walls of the container more often. So the pressure of the gas increases (Figure
1
5.3a). A graph of volume of gas plotted against ———— gives a proportional relationship (as shown by the


pressure


straight line in Figure 5.3b). We say that the volume is inversely proportional to the pressure.
a increase the b


pressure


Volume
gas


molecules So


 


 


 
1


pressure
Figure 5.3: a As the volume of a gas decreases, at constant temperature, its pressure increases due to the increased


frequency of the gas molecules hitting the walls of the container. b For an ideal gas a plot of the volume of gas against


 
shows a proportional relationship


pressure


 


IMPORTANT
Two variables are proportional if there is a constant ratio between them. Look at the figures for


temperature and gas volume in the table below:


Table 5.1: Data table showing temperature against gas volume.


 


 
When a gas is heated at constant pressure its volume increases (Figure 5.4a). This is because the particles
move faster and hit the walls of the container with greater force. For the pressure to be constant, the
molecules must get further apart. The volume of a gas at constant pressure is proportional to its


temperature measured in kelvin (Figure 5.4b).


 


 

£
=

>
K
molecules R molecules
i moving
moving 0- >
slowly faster 0


low temperature high temperature Temperature/K
Figure 5.4: a As the temperature increases, at constant pressure, the volume of a gas increases. Molecules hit the walls


with increased force. b For an ideal gas, the volume of a gas is proportional to its kelvin temperature.


 


 
An ideal gas will have a volume that varies exactly in proportion to its temperature and exactly in inverse


proportion to its pressure.


Question
4 chemical reactions involving gases are performed in sealed glass tubes that do not melt at high
temperatures. If the tubes have walls that are too thin, the tubes can easily break. Use the kinetic


theory of gases to explain why these tubes should not be heated to high temperatures.

Limitations of the ideal gas laws
Scientists have taken accurate measurements to show how the volumes of gases change with temperature
and pressure. These show us that gases do not always behave exactly as we expect an ideal gas to

behave. This is because real gases do not always obey the kinetic theory in two ways:

there is not zero attraction between the molecules

we cannot ignore the volume of the molecules themselves.
These differences are especially noticeable at very high pressures and very low temperatures. Under these

conditions:


the molecules are close to each other


the volume of the molecules is not negligible compared with the volume of the container
there are instantaneous dipole—induced dipole forces or permanent dipole—permanent dipole forces of


attraction between the molecules
attractive forces pull the molecules towards each other and away from the walls of the container


the pressure is lower than expected for an ideal gas


the effective volume of the gas is smaller than expected for an ideal gas.
Question


5 What is meant by the term ideal gas?


Under what conditions do real gases differ from ideal gases? Explain your answer.


The general gas equation


IMPORTANT


The ideal gas equation pV = nRT shows the relationship between pressure, volume, temperature and
number of moles of gas. Make sure that you can rearrange this equation to make any of these values
V


the subject of the expression, =


 
For an ideal gas, we can combine the laws about how the volume of a gas depends on temperature and
pressure. We also know from Section 3.8 that the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of moles


present. Putting all these together, gives us the ideal gas equation:
pV = nRT


p is the pressure in pascals, Pa


V is the volume of gas in cubic metres, m3 (1 m3 = 1000 dm3)
nis the number of moles of gas (» =


t


R is the gas constant, which has a value of 8.31 J


T is the temperature in kelvin, K.


Calculations using the general gas equation


If we know any four of the five physical quantities in the general gas equation, we can calculate the fifth.


IMPORTANT


To change °C to kelvin, add 273 to the Celsius (°C) temperature.

A pressure of 101 325 pascals = 1.0 atmosphere pressure.



WORKED EXAMPLES


 
Calculate the volume occupied by 0.500 mol of carbon dioxide at a pressure of 150 kPa anda


temperature of 19 °C.



Solution
Step 1: Change pressure and temperature to their correct units:
150 kPa = 150 000 Pa;
19 °C + 273 = 292K
Step 2: Rearrange the general gas equation to the form you need:

pV=nRT so =


Step 3: Substitute the figures:


=

_ 0.500 x 8.31 x 292


150 000


8.09 x m3


= 8.09
A flask of volume 5.00 dm? contained 4.00 g of oxygen.
Calculate the pressure exerted by the gas at a temperature of 127 °C.


(R = M, oxygen = 32.0)


 
Solution
Step 1: Change temperature and volume to their correct units and calculate the number of
moles of oxygen.
127 °C = 127 + 273 = 400 K
5 dm3 = m3 x 10-3 m3
1000
m
i=
M,
_ 40

mol
Step 2: Rearrange the general gas equation to the form you need:
nRT
V=nRT so
p p
Step 3: Substitute the figures:
_
iv
_ 0.125 x 8.31 x 400


5 x 10°
x 104 Pa


Note:
If you are given the pressure in kPa and the volume in you can insert these figures directly into
the equation without having to convert into Pa and This is because by changing kPa to Pa you


are multiplying by 1000 and by changing to m3 you are dividing by 1000. Because p and V are


| on the same side of the equation pV = nRT, the x 1000 and + 1000 cancel each other.


IMPORTANT


Remember that if you substitute the pressure in kPa in the equation pV = nRT, the volume of gas
calculated will be in dm3. If you substitute the pressure in Pa in the equation pV = nRT, the volume of


gas calculated will be in m3.


 


Calculating relative molecular masses
An accurate method of finding the relative molecular mass of a substance is to use a mass spectrometer


(see Chapter 3).
A less accurate method, but one that is suitable for a school laboratory, is to use the general gas equation
to find the mass of gas in a large flask. As the number of moles is the mass of a substance divided by its
relative molecular mass, we can find the relative molecular mass of a gas by simply substituting in the
general gas equation. Although weighing gases is a difficult process because they are so light and you


have to consider the buoyancy of the air, the method can give reasonable results.
You can apply this method to find the relative molecular mass of a volatile liquid. The volatile liquid is
injected into a gas syringe placed in a syringe oven (Figure 5.5). The liquid vaporises and the volume of the


vapour is recorded.


WORKED EXAMPLE
A flask of volume 2.00 dm? was found to contain 5.28 g of a gas. The pressure in the flask was 200


kPa and the temperature was 20 °C. Calculate the relative molecular mass of the gas.


(R =
Solution
Step 1: Change pressure, temperature and volume to their correct units.
200 kPa = 2.00 x 10° Pa
20 °C = 20 + 273 = 293 K
2.
2.00 =


Step 2: Rearrange the general gas equation to the form you need:


 


pV =nRT andn=


 


so
mRT


pV


 


which gives M, =


Step 3: Substitute the figures:


 
5.28 x 8.31 x 293
pV (2.00 x 10°) x (2.0 x
=


= 32 9g mol-!


 


Question
6 Calculate the volume occupied by 272 g of methane at a pressure of 250 kPa and a temperature

of 54 °C. (R = M, methane = 16.0)
pressure exerted by 0.25 mol of carbon monoxide in a 10 dm? flask is 120 kPa. Calculate the


temperature in the flask in kelvin.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 5.1


Determining relative molecular mass


thermometer
volatile liquid


hypodermic syringe


 


 


 


self-sealing rubber cap
syringe


light bulb syringe oven


Figure 5.5: The relative molecular mass of a volatile liquid can be found using a syringe oven.


 
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
syringe in the syringe oven and leave until the temperature is constant.
the volume of air in the gas syringe.


Fill a hypodermic syringe with the volatile liquid and find its total mass.
Inject a little of the liquid into the gas syringe then find the total mass of the hypodermic syringe


again.
Allow the liquid to vaporise in the gas syringe.
Record the final volume of vapour + air in the gas syringe.
Record the atmospheric temperature and pressure.
The calculation is carried out in the same way as Worked example 3.


The volume of vapour produced is:
final gas syringe volume


— initial gas syringe volume


The mass used in the calculation is:
initial mass of hypodermic syringe + liquid


— final mass of hypodermic syringe + liquid


 


Questions


7
When 0.08 g of liquid X was vaporised at 100 °C, 23 cm? of vapour was formed. The atmospheric


pressure was 1.02 x 10° Pa. Calculate the relative molecular mass of liquid X. (R = 8.31 J
A flask of volume 2 x 1073 m? contains 4.19 g of a gas. The pressure in the flask is 300 kPa and the


temperature is 20 °C. R = K~!


You can find the relative molecular mass using the expression:


Which one of the following gives the correct value for the relative molecular mass of the gas?
A 4.19 x 8.31 x 293
(300 x 10°) x (2 x


B 4.19 x 8.31 x 20
(300 x 10°) x (2 x
C 4.19 x 8.31 x 293

(300) x (2 x 10°)
D x 10°) x (2 x
4.19 x 8.31 x 293


5.3 The liquid state
The behaviour of liquids


When we heat a solid:
the energy transferred to the solid makes the particles vibrate more vigorously


e the forces of attraction between the particles weaken


the solid changes to a liquid at its melting point.


IMPORTANT
The melting point of a solid is the temperature at which it changes to a liquid at 1 atmosphere


pressure.


 


We call this change of state melting.
For ionic compounds, we need a high temperature to melt the substance because ionic bonding is very
strong. For molecular solids, we need a lower temperature, just enough to overcome the weak


intermolecular forces between the particles.
The particles in a liquid are still close to each other but they have enough kinetic energy to keep sliding
past each other in a fairly random way. They do not move freely as gas particles do. For brief periods, the
particles in liquids are arranged in a slightly ordered way. But this order is always being broken up when


the particles gain kinetic energy from neighbouring particles.


When we cool a liquid, the particles:
e lose kinetic energy so they do not move around so readily


experience increasing forces of attraction


stop sliding past each other when the temperature is sufficiently low; the liquid solidifies.


We call this change of state freezing.
Vaporisation and vapour pressure

When we heat a liquid:

the energy transferred to the liquid makes the particles move faster

the forces of attraction between the particles weaken
e the particles with most energy are the first to escape from the forces holding them together in the


liquid


the liquid evaporates: this happens at a temperature below the boiling point
the forces weaken enough for all the particles to become completely free from each other; they move


fast and randomly and they spread out


the liquid boils; this happens at the boiling point.
This change from the liquid state to the gas state is called vaporisation. The energy required to change


one mole of liquid to one mole of gas is called the enthalpy change of vaporisation.

When we cool a vapour, the particles:

lose kinetic energy so the molecules move around less quickly


experience increasing forces of attraction
move more slowly and become closer together when the temperature is sufficiently low; the gas


liquefies.


We call this change of state condensation.
These changes in state are reversible. Water can be boiled to form steam, and steam can be condensed to
form liquid water. These changes involve opposite energy transfers. For example: energy has to be
transferred to water to boil it to form steam. But when steam condenses to form water, energy is


transferred from the steam.
If we put some water in an open beaker, it evaporates until none is left. But what happens when we allow


water to evaporate in a closed container?


 


 


 
Figure 5.6: a Water molecules move from liquid to vapour. b As more molecules move from liquid to vapour, some begin
to move back to the liquid. ¢ An equilibrium is reached with molecules going from liquid to vapour at the same rate as


from vapour to liquid.


 
At first, water molecules escape from the surface of the liquid to become vapour (Figure 5.6a). AS more and
more molecules escape, the molecules in the vapour become closer together. Eventually the molecules
with lower kinetic energy will not be able to overcome the attractive forces of neighbouring molecules. The
vapour begins to condense. So some water molecules return to the liquid (Figure 5.6b). Eventually, water
molecules return to the liquid at the same rate as water molecules escape to the vapour. A position of

equilibrium is reached (Figure 5.6c; see Chapter 8).
At equilibrium the concentration of water molecules in the vapour remains constant.

equal rate


water molecules of movement water molecules


in liquid in vapour
In this situation the pressure exerted by a vapour in equilibrium with its liquid is called its vapour
pressure. The vapour pressure is caused by the gas particles hitting the walls of the container. Vapour


pressure will increase when the temperature increases because:


the gas particles have more kinetic energy
the gas particles move faster, so they are able to overcome intermolecular forces of attraction more


easily.


IMPORTANT


The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which it changes to a gas at 1 atmosphere (101 325
Pa) pressure. A more exact definition is the temperature at which the vapour pressure is equal to the


atmospheric pressure.


 


Question
9 is a reddish-brown liquid. Some liquid bromine is placed in a closed jar. The bromine starts to
evaporate. The colour of the vapour above the liquid bromine becomes darker and darker. After a time

the bromine vapour does not get any darker.
Use ideas about moving particles to explain these observations.


5.4 The solid state
Many ionic, metallic and covalent compounds are crystalline. The regular structure of crystals is due to the
regular packing of the particles within the crystal. We call this regularly repeating arrangement of ions,


atoms or molecules a crystal lattice.


lonic lattices
lonic lattices have three-dimensional arrangements of alternating positive and negative ions. Compounds


with ionic lattices are sometimes called giant ionic structures.
The type of lattice formed depends on the relative sizes of the ions present. The ionic lattices for sodium
chloride and magnesium oxide are cubic. In sodium chloride, each sodium ion is surrounded by six
oppositely charged chloride ions. The chloride ions are much larger than the sodium ions. The sodium ions


fit into the spaces between the chloride ions so that they are as close as possible to them (Figure 5.7).


a b


 
Figure 5.7: The arrangement of the ions in sodium chloride: a the actual packing of the ions, b an ‘exploded’ view so that


you can see the arrangement of the ions clearly.


 
Magnesium oxide has the same lattice structure as sodium chloride. Magnesium ions replace sodium ions


and the oxide ions replace the chloride ions.


The properties of ionic compounds reflect their structure as well as their bonding:
e They are hard. It takes a lot of energy to scratch the surface because of the strong attractive forces


keeping the ions together.
e They are brittle. lonic crystals may split apart when hit in the same direction as the layers of ions
(Figure 5.8). The layers of ions may be displaced by the force of the blow so that ions with the same
charge come together. The repulsions between thousands of ions in the layers, all with the same


charge, cause the crystals to split along these cleavage planes.
They have high melting points and high boiling points. This is because the attraction between the large
numbers of oppositely charged ions in the lattice acts in all directions and bonds them strongly
together. The melting points and boiling points increase with the charge density on the ions. So
magnesium oxide, has a higher melting point (2852 °C) than sodium chloride, (801
°C). This is because there is a greater electrostatic attraction between doubly charged positive and


negative ions than between singly charged ions of similar size.
Many ionic compounds are soluble in water because they can form ion-dipole bonds (see Section


19.4).


They only conduct electricity when molten or in solution (see Section 4.9).


 
Figure 5.8: Sapphires sparkle in the light when polished. They are cut by exerting a force on the cleavage planes between


layers of ions in the crystal.


 


Metallic lattices


IMPORTANT
Remember that metals conduct electricity when solid or liquid due to mobile delocalised but
ionic giant structures only conduct when liquid (molten) or when in aqueous solution due to mobile


 
In Chapter 4, we learnt that a metallic lattice consists of ions surrounded by a sea of electrons. The ions are
often packed in hexagonal layers or in a cubic arrangement. Figure 5.9 shows part of a lattice of copper
ions arranged in layers. When a force is applied, the layers can slide over each other. But in a metallic
bond, the attractive forces between the metal ions and the delocalised electrons act in all directions. So
when the layers slide, new metallic bonds are easily re-formed between ions in new lattice positions and
the delocalised electrons (Figure 5.11). The delocalised electrons continue to hold the ions in the lattice
together. The metal now has a different shape. This explains why metals are malleable (they can be
hammered into different shapes) and ductile (they can be drawn into wires). The high tensile strength and
hardness of most metals is also due to the strong attractive forces between the metal ions and the


delocalised electrons.


Figure 5.9: Layers of copper ions.


 


 

Figure 5.10: You can clearly see the metal crystals or ‘grains’ in this metal plate.





OOOOOO



Figure 5.11: When a force is applied to a metallic structure, the layers slide over each other and re-form in new lattice


positions.


 


Alloys and their properties
An alloy is a mixture of two or more metals or a metal with a non-metal. The metal added to create the


alloy becomes part of the crystal lattice of the other metal.
Brass is an alloy of copper (70%) with zinc (30%). It is stronger than copper but still malleable. For these


reasons, it is used for musical instruments, ornaments and household items such as door handles.


But why is brass stronger than pure copper?
Zinc ions are larger than copper ions. The presence of different-sized metal ions makes the arrangement of
the lattice less regular. This stops the layers of ions from sliding over each other so easily when a force is


applied (Figure 5.12).
force —>


layers slide
layers cannot slide


very easily


force —>


 


alloy
Figure 5.12: The layers of ions in an alloy slide less easily than in a pure metal because the structure of the lattice is less


regular.


 
Pure aluminium is softer than many metals. It is ductile and has high electrical and thermal conductivity.
Because of its low strength, pure aluminium is of little use in engineering. But its strength can be increased
by adding other elements such as copper, magnesium, silicon and manganese. Many alloys of aluminium
are lightweight, strong and resistant to corrosion. These are used for the bodies of aircraft, for the cylinder
blocks of car engines and for bicycle frames, all situations where low density combined with strength and


corrosion resistance is important.
Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. A 33-metre high bronze statue was built near the harbour in Rhodes
(Greece) over 2000 years ago. The statue fell down after an earthquake and was eventually bought by a


Syrian merchant. The bronze was recycled to make useful implements.
Question
10 Explain the following:


why are most metals strong, but ionic solids are brittle?


why is an alloy of copper and tin stronger than either copper or tin alone?


Simple molecular lattices
Substances with a simple molecular structure, such as iodine, can also form crystals (Figure 5.13). This


reflects the regular packing of the molecules in a lattice structure.


 


Figure 5.13: lodine molecules are arranged in a lattice structure.


 
Ice also forms a crystalline lattice. Ice and water have peculiar properties because of hydrogen bonding


(see Section 4.8).
The distance between the nuclei of neighbouring iodine molecules is greater than the distance between the
nuclei within the iodine molecule. This is because the forces between the molecules are weak
intermolecular forces, whereas the forces between the atoms within the molecule are strong covalent
bonds. Very little energy is needed to overcome the weak intermolecular forces between the molecules.


The lattice is easily broken down when iodine crystals are heated, so iodine has a low melting point.


Question


11 The table shows some properties of four elements. Use the data to answer the following questions.


Table 5.2: Information table for Question 11.


 


 
aluminium with a steel core used for overhead electricity cables in preference to copper?


b why many car engine blocks are made from aluminium alloys rather than from steel.


the differences in tensile strength and electrical conductivity of iron and sulfur.


Giant molecular structures


IMPORTANT


GIANT STRUCTURE: Most giant structures have a network of either covalent bonds (molecular giant
structure), metallic bonds (metallic giant structure) or ionic bonds (ionic giant structure). The network
of strong bonds is hard to break and so the melting and boiling points of these structures are generally


very high.


 
Some covalently bonded structures have a three-dimensional network of covalent bonds throughout the


whole structure. We call these structures giant molecular structures or giant covalent structures.
They have high melting and boiling points because of the large number of strong covalent bonds linking
the whole structure. Elements such as carbon (graphite and diamond), and compounds such as silicon
dioxide, can be giant molecular structures. Diamond and graphite are different forms of the same element.

Different crystalline or molecular forms of the same element are called allotropes.
IMPORTANT



Allotropes are different crystalline forms of the same element. The term only applies to solids.


Diamond, graphite and buckminsterfullerene are allotropes of carbon.


Graphite
In graphite, the carbon atoms are arranged in planar layers. Within the layers, the carbon atoms are
arranged in hexagons. Each carbon atom is joined to three other carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds
(Figure 5.14). The fourth electron of each carbon atom occupies a p orbital. These p orbitals on every
carbon atom in each planar layer overlap sideways. A cloud of delocalised electrons is formed above and
below the plane of the carbon rings. These electron clouds join up to form extended delocalised rings of


electrons.
The layers of carbon atoms are kept next to each other by weak instantaneous dipole—induced dipole


forces.


The properties of graphite are related to its structure.
High melting and boiling points: there is strong covalent bonding throughout the layers of carbon


atoms. A lot of energy is needed to overcome these strong bonds.


Figure 5.14: The structure of graphite.


 
Softness: graphite is easily scratched. The forces between the layers of carbon atoms are weak. The
layers of graphite can slide over each other when a force is applied. The layers readily flake off. This


‘flakiness’ is why graphite is used in pencil ‘leads’ and feels slippery.
Good conductor of electricity: when a voltage is applied, the delocalised electrons (mobile


electrons) can move along the layers.


Diamond
In diamond, each carbon atom forms four covalent bonds with other carbon atoms (Figure 5.15). The
carbon atoms are positioned around each other in a tetrahedral arrangement. The network of carbon
atoms extends almost unbroken throughout the whole structure. The regular arrangement of the atoms


gives diamond a crystalline structure.


 


Figure 5.15: The structure of diamond.


 


The properties of diamond are related to its structure.


High melting and boiling points: there is strong covalent bonding throughout the whole structure.


A lot of energy is needed to break these strong bonds and separate the atoms.
Hardness: diamond cannot be scratched easily because it is difficult to break the three-dimensional


network of strong covalent bonds.
¢ Does not conduct electricity: all of the four outer electrons on every carbon atom are involved in


covalent bonding. This means that there are no free electrons available to carry the electric current.
Most of the diamonds used around the world have been mined from the crust. However, artificial
diamonds can be made by heating other forms of carbon under high pressure. Artificial diamonds are too


small to be used for jewellery but they can be used for drill tips.


Silicon(IV) oxide
There are several forms of oxide. The silicon(IV) oxide found in the mineral quartz (Figure 5.16)


has a structure similar to diamond (Figure 5.17).


 


Figure 5.16: The shape of these quartz crystals reflects the regular arrangement of the silicon and oxygen atoms.


 


 


Figure 5.17: The structure of silicon(IV) oxide.


 
Each silicon atom is bonded to four oxygen atoms but each oxygen atom is bonded to only two silicon
atoms. So the formula for silicon(IV) oxide is SiOz. Silicon dioxide has properties similar to that of diamond.


It forms hard, colourless crystals with high melting and boiling points and it does not conduct electricity.


Sand is largely silicon(IV) oxide.


IMPORTANT
Remember that most giant molecular structures do not conduct electricity. One exception is graphite.

Most do not conduct heat but diamond is a good conductor of heat.




Questions
the following properties of silicon(IV) oxide by referring to its structure and bonding.
has a high melting point.
does not conduct electricity.
solid.


itis hard.


13 Copy and complete the table below to compare the properties of giant ionic, giant molecular, giant
metallic and simple molecular structures.


Simple molecular


Giant molecular


Two examples


Particles present


Forces keeping particles together


Hardness


Melting points and boiling points


Table 5.3: Table template for Question 13.


 


 


14 The table shows some physical properties of three substances X, Y and Z.



Table 5.4: Information table for Question 14.


 

 

Which one of these statements about X, Y and Z is completely true?


Xhasa giant ionic structure, Y has a giant molecular structure, Z is a metal.
metal, Y has a simple molecular structure, Z has a giant molecular structure.
Y has a simple molecular structure, Z has a giant ionic structure.


D


X has a giant ionic structure, Y has a simple molecular structure, Z is a metal.


IMPORTANT


Remember that not all metals have high melting points. Group 1 metals and mercury have lower
boiling points than some non-metals. So do not use high melting point as a characteristic of metals
unless you are only referring to transition elements. What distinguishes metals from most other


structures is that that they conduct electricity when solid.


 


5.5 Fullerenes
Graphite and diamond are not the only allotropes of carbon. In recent years, substances called fullerenes
have been made. The structure of many fullerenes is based on rings of carbon atoms, as is the structure of
graphite. But many fullerenes exhibit properties unlike those of graphite. The individual particles in
fullerenes may have one of their dimensions between 0.1 and 100 nanometres (1 nanometre = 10-9 m).
Particles of this size are called nanoparticles. Another form of carbon, graphene, can be regarded as a


single layer of graphite.
Fullerenes are allotropes of carbon in the form of hollow spheres or tubes. They are similar in structure to
graphite, in that each carbon atom is bonded to three other carbon atoms. They contain rings of carbon


atoms arranged in hexagons and in addition many contain rings of carbon atoms arranged in pentagons.


Buckminsterfullerene
The first fullerene discovered was called buckminsterfullerene, (Figure 5.18). Buckminsterfullerene
is a simple molecular structure. The molecule has the shape of a football (soccer ball). The carbon
atoms are arranged at the corners of 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons. The bonds where two hexagons join
are shorter than the bonds between the hexagons and the pentagons. As in graphite, some of the electrons
in are delocalised, but to a lesser extent than in graphite. Since the discovery of the molecule,
many types of buckminsterfullerene have been discovered. Some are ball-shaped molecules that are


multiples of Other fullerene molecules include C79 and


 


Figure 5.18: The shape of a buckminsterfullerene molecule, a is similar to that of a football, b.


 


The properties of buckminsterfullerene are significantly different from those of graphite and diamond.
e It has a relatively low sublimation point. It turns directly from the solid to the vapour state when
heated to about 600 °C. (Graphite only turns from the solid to the vapour state at about 3700 °C.) This
is because there are weak intermolecular forces between each buckminsterfullerene molecule and no


continuous layered giant structure as in graphite.
e Itis relatively soft because it does not require much energy to overcome the weak intermolecular


forces.
a poor conductor of electricity compared with graphite because the extent of electron


delocalisation is lower.
is slightly soluble in solvents such as carbon disulfide and methylbenzene. Neither diamond nor


graphite is soluble in common solvents.
e It is more reactive than graphite or diamond. Buckminsterfullerene reacts with hydrogen, fluorine,
chlorine, bromine and oxygen. This is due to the relatively high electron density in certain parts of the


molecule (see electrophilic addition in Section 15.1).


Nanotubes


Note: Nanotubes and graphene are not part of the syllabus, but you may be asked questions about the

structure and related properties of an unfamiliar substance from given information, e.g. a diagram of the



| structure.
A second type of fullerene is a class of molecules described as nanotubes. Nanotubes are fullerenes of
hexagonally arranged carbon atoms like a single layer of graphite bent into the form of a cylinder (Figure
5.19). The first nanotubes to be made were one layer of carbon atoms in thickness. More recently,


nanotubes have been made with thicker walls with several tubes inside one another.
Although the diameter of a nanotube is very small, it can be made relatively long. The length of the


nanotube cylinder can be a million times greater than its diameter.


 


Figure 5.19: Part of the structure of a nanotube. The ends of the cylinder are often closed.


 


Nanotubes have characteristic properties:
e They have high electrical conductivity along the long axis of the cylinder. This is because, like graphite,
some of the electrons are delocalised and are able to move along the cylinder when a voltage is


applied.
They have a very high tensile strength when a force is applied along the long axis of the cylinder. They


can be up to 100 times stronger than steel of the same thickness.
They have very high melting points (typically about 3500 °C). This is because there is strong covalent


bonding throughout the structure.
Fullerenes have a large range of potential uses. Scientists can attach reactive groups to their surfaces and
metal complexes (see Section 24.3) can also be formed. Small molecules or atoms can be trapped in the
cages of buckminsterfullerenes. Possible medical uses include delivering drugs to specific places in the
body. Nanotubes are used in tiny electrical circuits as ‘wires’ and as electrodes in paper-thin batteries. They
can be incorporated into clothing and sports equipment for added strength. They have also been used in


the treatment of certain types of cancer.


Graphene
Graphene is a single isolated layer of graphite (Figure 5.20). The hexagonally arranged sheet of carbon

atoms is not completely rigid and it can be distorted.

Graphene has some of the properties of graphite, but they are more exaggerated. For example:

Graphene is the most chemically reactive form of carbon.
Single sheets of graphene burn at very low temperatures and are much more reactive than graphite.


Graphene is extremely strong for its mass.


amount of material, graphene conducts electricity and heat much better than graphite.


 


Figure 5.20: a Part of a graphene sheet. b ‘Waves’ in a sheet of graphene.


 
It has been said that ‘a one square metre hammock made of graphene could support a 4 kg cat but would
weigh only as much as the cat’s whisker’. Potential applications of graphene include use in tiny electrical

circuits and for tiny transistors, touchscreens, solar cells and other energy storage devices.


Question
15 Suggest, using ideas of structure and bonding, why:
is converted from a solid to a gas at a relatively low temperature


b is a good conductor of electricity


is relatively soft.


REFLECTION
with another learner to draw up a mind map (spider diagram) to show different types of
chemical structure. For each structure, include the types of bonding and show how its physical
properties relate to either structure or bonding or both. For example, starting from the centre, you


might have: all substances — type of structure type of bonding melting point high because...


How would you improve the mind map?
Work with another learner to write a list of scientific words that are new to you in this chapter
(they don’t have to be key words). Then ask the other learner to explain one of the words to you. It


is then your turn to explain a word that the other learner has chosen from the list.

What was the most challenging word for you to explain?



SUMMARY


Ideal gases have zero particle volume and no intermolecular forces of attraction.
The volume of a gas under different conditions of temperature and pressure can be calculated using the ideal gas


equation pV = nRT.


The ideal gas equation can be used to determine the relative molecular mass of simple molecules.
lonic compounds form a giant three-dimensional lattice structure containing ions in a regularly repeating pattern.


The high melting points of ionic substances are due to strong ionic forces acting in all directions between the ions.
The low melting points of simple molecular structures such as iodine are due to weak intermolecular forces between


the molecules.
The high melting points of giant molecular structures such as diamond are due to the large number of strong


covalent bonds arranged in a regularly repeating pattern.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
types of structure are:
molecular
ionic
giant metallic


e simple molecular
two examples of a giant ionic structure and two examples of a simple molecular [4]


structure.
Explain why substances with giant ionic structures are often brittle, but metallic [6]


structures are malleable.
Explain why giant molecular structures have higher melting points than simple [6]


molecular structures.
and graphite are two forms of carbon with giant molecular structures. [5]


Explain why graphite conducts electricity but diamond does not.


2 The structures of carbon dioxide and silicon dioxide are shown in the diagram below, 21]


 


Use your knowledge of structure and bonding to explain the following:
3
dioxide is a gas at room temperature
3
oxide is a solid with a high melting point
2
carbon dioxide nor silicon(IV) oxide conducts electricity.
[Total: 8]
3 question is about gases.
1
is meant by the term ideal gas?
b what conditions does a gas not behave ideally? Explain your answer for one of [4]
these conditions.
c Helium is a noble gas. It exists as single atoms. Explain why:
2
has a very low boiling point
1
ii helium does not conduct electricity.
balloon contains 0.500 kg of helium. Calculate the volume of the gas in the


balloon at a pressure of 0.500 x 10° Pa and a temperature of —20.0 °C. [51

(R = A, He = 4.0)
[Total: 13]
4 Water and bromine are both simple molecular substances.


7
Both water and bromine form a lattice structure in the solid state. What is the


meaning of the term /attice?


[2]


The boiling point of water is 100 °C. The boiling point of bromine is 59 °C. Explain the [4]


reason for this difference in terms of intermolecular forces.
Use ideas about the kinetic theory to explain what happens when liquid bromine


evaporates to form bromine vapour.


[4]


When 0.20 g of a liquid, Y, with a simple molecular structure was evaporated it produced


80 of vapour.
The temperature was 98 °C and the pressure 1.1 x 105 Pa. Calculate the relative


molecular mass of Y.


(R =


The table gives data on the physical properties of five substances, A to E.


b


c


Copy the table and fill in the gaps.
Electrical conductivity


Substance Melting point as a solid as a liquid Type of structure
[5]


[Total: 15]


 


Explain the magnitude (how high or low) of the melting point and electrical conductivity [6]


of substance A.


[5]


Explain the magnitude of the melting point and electrical conductivity of substance B.


The uses of metals are often related to their properties.
a


b


c
Describe the structure of a typical metal.


Explain why metals are malleable.


Consider the information in the table below to answer the questions that follow.
[Total: 18]
[2]


[4]
Density / g cm | Tensile strength / 101° | Electrical conductivity / 108 S


Pa


| 70


i Suggest why aluminium is more suitable than steel for building aeroplane bodies.


 


[1]


ii why overhead electricity cables are made from aluminium with a steel core [5]


rather than just from copper.


d_ effect of alloying copper with zinc on the strength of the alloy is shown in the table


e


below.


 


0 100 1.4


Describe and explain the change in tensile strength as the percentage of zinc increases [5]


from 0% to 40%.


State the name of the alloy of copper with zinc.


The diagram shows the structures of graphite and diamond.


 
[1]


[Total: 18]


Use the diagrams and your knowledge of structure and bonding to answer the following questions.


b


c
Explain why both diamond and graphite have high melting points.
i Explain why graphite is used in making handles for tennis racquets.


ii Explain why graphite is used in pencil ‘leads’ for writing.


Explain why diamond is used on the tips of high-speed drills.


Crystals of sodium chloride have a lattice structure.

b

Describe a sodium chloride lattice.

Explain the following properties of sodium chloride.


i Sodium chloride has a high melting point.


ii Sodium chloride conducts electricity when molten but not when solid.


Sodium chloride is hard but brittle.


The diagram shows some allotropes of carbon.


 


 


 


   
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[Total: 14]


[3]
[3]
[3]
[5]

[Total: 14]
ete |

B
[1]
Give the name of allotrope A, which has the formula
Explain in terms of structure and bonding why structure A is gaseous at 800 °C but [6]
diamond is not.
Structure B shows an allotrope of carbon in the form of tubes.
Describe the similarities and differences between structure B and graphite.
Structure C is stronger than structure B when a force is applied in the same direction as


the long axis of the tube.


[5]

Explain why structure C is stronger.
[Total: 16]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section more work there move on
explain the origin of pressure in a gas in terms of collisions


between gas molecules and the walls of the container
explain that ideal gases have zero particle volume and no

intermolecular forces of attraction
use the ideal gas equation, pV = in calculations, including 5.2
the determination of relative molecular mass
describe the lattice structure of giant ionic structures including 5.4
sodium chloride and magnesium oxide

describe the lattice structure of simple molecular structures


including iodine, buckminsterfullerene and ice
describe the lattice structure of giant molecular structures 5.4


including silicon(IV) oxide, graphite and diamond
describe the lattice structure of giant metallic structures 5.4

including copper
describe, interpret and predict the effect of different types of
structure and bonding on the physical properties of
substances such as:
on melting point
effect boiling point


effect on electrical conductivity


effect on solubility
deduce the type of structure and bonding present in a

substance from given information.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Make a list of reactions that are definitely exothermic and another list of reactions that you know
are endothermic. Explain to another learner how you know that these reactions are either


exothermic or endothermic.
Work with another learner to draw a fully labelled reaction pathway diagram (energy profile
diagram) for an endothermic reaction.


Explain to another learner how this diagram shows that the reaction is endothermic.
Take it in turns to explain these terms to another learner: bond energy; enthalpy change; activation


energy; standard conditions.
Write the displayed formulae (structures showing all atoms and all bonds) of the following:


NH3, Check your answers with those in a textbook.
Work with another learner to describe how to calculate the energy change in the reaction +


+ by using bond energies. You can do this in the form of a table if you wish.


ENERGY IN OUR WORLD


 


Will some countries disappear?
The transfer of energy to or from substances plays a great part in industry and everyday life. At
present, most vehicles, aircraft and power stations depend on the combustion of fossil fuels such as
petrol, kerosene or natural gas. The downside to this is that when fossil fuels are burned, carbon
dioxide is produced. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas which, with other greenhouse gases, is


responsible for the enhanced global warming of the Earth’s atmosphere.
Although the concentration of carbon dioxide in the air is very low, in the last 150 years its
concentration has increased from 280 parts per million parts of air to 400 parts per million. This has
caused the temperature of the Earth’s surface to rise by 0.9 °C over the past 150 years. Most of this
increase has happened in the last 35 years. This has resulted in enough melting of the ice caps in the
Arctic and Antarctic to make the sea level rise by nearly 20 cm. If this carries on at the present rate,
low-lying islands such the Maldives (Figure 6.1) in the Indian Ocean (maximum height 5 m above sea
level) and Vanuatu, Kiribati and the Solomon Islands in the Pacific Ocean will disappear under the sea.
Their populations will have to move elsewhere. Low-lying areas in many other countries will also be


affected.
Carbon dioxide also dissolves in the oceans causing the water to become slightly acidic. Acidification
of the oceans has increased by 30% over the last 150 years and is presently increasing by 2 billion
tonnes each year. This is having an effect on organisms such as corals, which are very sensitive to


small changes in pH.
Scientists and engineers have responded to this problem by trying to reduce our dependence on
burning fossil fuels. The rise in the use of solar energy, wind energy and battery-powered vehicles,
however, is slow. So scientists have recently been trying to think of ideas such as capturing and

solidifying carbon dioxide in order to reduce the amount escaping into the atmosphere.




Figure 6.1: The islands of the Maldives may disappear below the sea in the next century if the rate of enhanced


global warming does not decrease.


 
Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e As consumers we have a choice of what car to buy or how to heat or cool our homes. How can


individual people help to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide that is going into the atmosphere?
Why do you think that the governments of many countries are not taking more steps to deal with


enhanced global warming?
e The chemical industry is often accused of causing environmental problems. Do you think this is


fair? Or are we too ready to blame others for environmental problems that we are responsible for?


 


6.1 What are enthalpy changes?


Exothermic or endothermic?
Chemical reactions that transfer heat energy to the surroundings are described as exothermic. In an
exothermic reaction, the temperature of the surroundings increases. For example, when magnesium
reacts with sulfuric acid in a test-tube, the energy released is transferred to the surroundings and the


temperature of the reaction mixture in the tube increases.
Mg(s) + + (energy released)

The surroundings include:

the solvent (in this case water)

e the air around the test-tube


the test-tube itself


anything dipping into the test-tube (e.g. a thermometer).


Other examples of exothermic reactions include:
the combustion of fuels
the oxidation of carbohydrates in the bodies of animals and plants (respiration)


e the reaction of water with quicklime (calcium oxide) (see Section 11.4).
We describe chemical reactions that absorb heat energy from the surroundings as endothermic. In an
endothermic reaction, the temperature of the surroundings decreases (Figure 6.2). For example, when
sodium hydrogencarbonate reacts with an aqueous solution of citric acid in a test-tube, the temperature of
the reaction mixture in the tube decreases because the citric acid and sodium hydrogencarbonate are


absorbing the heat energy from the solvent, the test-tube and the air.


 
Figure 6.2: Using a cooling pack to treat a sports injury. When you rub or press the pack, water and ammonium chloride


crystals mix. As the crystals dissolve, energy is transferred from the surroundings, cooling the injury.


 


Other examples of endothermic reactions include:
the decomposition of limestone by heating (all thermal decomposition reactions are endothermic)
e photosynthesis (in which the energy is supplied by sunlight)


dissolving certain ammonium salts in water


+ aq

ammonium chloride water ammonium ions chloride ions
Question



each process as exothermic or endothermic:
burning of magnesium in air
the crystallisation of sulfate from a saturated solution
the thermal decomposition of magnesium nitrate


fermentation of glucose by yeast


evaporation of sea water.


Enthalpy changes and enthalpy profile diagrams
The energy exchange between a chemical reaction and its surroundings at constant pressure is called the
enthalpy change. Enthalpy is the total energy associated with the materials that react. The symbol for
enthalpy is H. We cannot measure enthalpy, but we can measure an enthalpy change when heat energy is


exchanged with the surroundings. We can write this as:
AH


enthalpy change = enthalpy of products — enthalpy of reactants
The symbol A is the upper case Greek letter ‘delta’. This symbol is often used to mean a change ina


quantity.
For example, AT means a change in temperature and AH means the enthalpy change.


The units of enthalpy change are kilojoules per mole (kJ
We can draw reaction pathway diagrams (also known as enthalpy profile diagrams) to show enthalpy
changes. The enthalpy of the reactants and products is shown on the y-axis. The x-axis shows the reaction
pathway, with reactants on the left and products on the right. Reaction pathway diagrams usually also
show the activation energy, E,, as a hump (up and down curve) between the reactants and the products.
The activation energy is the minimum energy that colliding particles must possess for a reaction to
happen. Activation energy always has a positive value of AH because enough energy has to be absorbed to
increase the kinetic energy of the reactant molecules so that they collide with enough force to break bonds


(see Section 6.5).
For an exothermic reaction, energy is released to the surroundings. So the enthalpy of the reactants must
be greater than the enthalpy of the products. We can see from the reaction pathway diagram for the


combustion of methane (Figure 6.3) that — is negative.


Enthalpy, H/kJ
   


    


 

AH = -890.3 kJ
+
products


0+ >


 


0 Reaction pathway


Figure 6.3: Reaction pathway diagram for the combustion of methane.


 
We can include this information in the equation for the reaction:


CH,(g) + + = —890.3 kj


The negative sign shows that the reaction is exothermic.


For an endothermic reaction, energy is absorbed from the surroundings by the substances in the reaction.
So the enthalpy of the products must be greater than the enthalpy of the reactants. We can see from the
reaction pathway diagram for the thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate (Figure 6.4) that


Hreactants iS positive.


CaCO3(s) CaO(s) + AH = +572


The positive sign shows that the reaction is endothermic.
Enthalpy, kJ mol 1



 
   


    
+
}
products
AH = +572 kJ


H
reactants


reactant(s)



Reaction pathway


Figure 6.4: Reaction pathway diagram for the decomposition of calcium carbonate


 


IMPORTANT


For an exothermic reaction, heat is lost from the reactants. The value of AH is negative.


For an endothermic reaction, heat is gained by the reactants. The value of AH is positive.
When drawing reaction pathway diagrams, remember that the activation energy arrow should start


at the level of the reactants and end at the highest point on the energy hump.
When drawing the arrow for AH make sure that the arrow points downwards for an exothermic


reaction and upwards for an endothermic reaction.


 
Question
2 full reaction pathway diagrams including activation energy for:

combustion of sulfur to form sulfur dioxide
endothermic reaction + C(s) H2(g) + CO(g)


6.2 Standard enthalpy changes


Standard conditions
To make any comparison of enthalpy changes a fair comparison, we must use the same conditions, called


standard conditions. These are:


of 101 kPa (1.01 x 10° Pa, approximately normal atmospheric pressure)
atemperature of 298 K (25 °C) (add 273 to the Celsius temperature to convert a temperature into


kelvin)
each substance involved in the reaction is in its normal physical state (solid, liquid or gas) at 101 kPa


and 298 K.
The symbol is used to indicate that the enthalpy change refers to a reaction carried out under standard


conditions.
The information in the equation:


+ + AH® = kJ
shows us that when one mole of methane gas reacts with two moles of oxygen gas to form one mole of
carbon dioxide gas and two moles of water in the liquid state, the standard enthalpy change is —890.3 kJ



A variety of enthalpy changes


We can describe enthalpy changes according to the type of chemical reaction taking place. For example:
enthalpy change of formation
enthalpy change of combustion


enthalpy change of neutralisation.


In more general cases we can use the term:


enthalpy change of reaction.


Standard enthalpy change of reaction, AH?
The standard enthalpy change of reaction, is the enthalpy change when the amounts of
reactants shown in the stoichiometric equation react to give products under standard conditions. The


reactants and products must be in their standard states.
The symbol for standard enthalpy change of reaction is Enthalpy changes of reaction can be


exothermic or endothermic.
The equation that describes the reaction must be given. For example, the equation:
1


+ AHS = —286 kj
shows us the enthalpy change when one mole of water is formed from hydrogen and oxygen. In this case,


286 of energy is released.
However, if we write the equation as:


+ > =


two moles of water are formed from hydrogen and oxygen. In this case, 572 kJ of energy is released.


Standard enthalpy change of formation,
The standard enthalpy change of formation, is the enthalpy change when one mole of a
compound is formed from its elements under standard conditions. The reactants and products must be in


their standard states.


The symbol for standard enthalpy change of formation is Enthalpy changes of formation can be
exothermic or endothermic. We write the formula of the compound in square brackets after AH? to help us


when we do calculations involving enthalpy changes. Examples are:


2Fe(s) + > Fe,03(s) =


C(graphite) + 2S(s) > AH, = +98.7
Note that the state symbol for carbon is shown as ‘graphite’. This is because there are several forms of
carbon but the most stable is graphite. We choose the most stable form when writing equations where


enthalpy changes are shown.


By definition, the standard enthalpy change of formation of any element in its standard state is zero.


Standard enthalpy change of combustion,
The standard enthalpy change of combustion, is the enthalpy change when one mole of a
substance is burnt in excess oxygen under standard conditions. The reactants and products must be in


their standard states.
The symbol for standard enthalpy change of combustion is Enthalpy changes of combustion are


always exothermic. The substances combusted can be either elements or compounds.


S(s) + > [S(s)] = —296.8


+ 202(g) CO2(g) + AH® = —890.3
Note that the first equation can be considered as either the enthalpy change of combustion of sulfur or the


enthalpy change of formation of sulfur dioxide.


Question
Identify each of the following reactions as AH®, AH? or AH?
MgO(s) + CO2(g)
+


+ NH3(g)
1


+


Standard enthalpy change of neutralisation,


The standard enthalpy change of neutralisation, is the enthalpy change when one mole of


water is formed by the reaction of an acid with an alkali under standard conditions.
For example:
+ NaOH(aq) > NaCl(aq) + AH® =


For any acid-alkali reaction the ionic equation is:

H*(aq) +
The other ions in solution and Na*) are spectator ions and take no part in the reaction (see Section
3.6).


6.3 Measuring enthalpy changes


We can measure the enthalpy change of some reactions by different techniques.
We can measure the enthalpy change of some reactions by a technique called calorimetry. The apparatus
used is called a calorimeter. A simple calorimeter can be a polystyrene drinking cup (Figure 6.5), a vacuum


flask or a metal can.
thermometer (reading to 0.2°C)


plastic lid



reaction polystyrene cup


mixture


 


Figure 6.5: A polystyrene cup can act as a calorimeter for finding some enthalpy changes.


 
When carrying out experiments in calorimeters, we use known amounts of reactants and known volumes of
liquids. We also measure the temperature change of the liquid in the calorimeter as the reaction occurs.


The thermometer should be accurate to 0.1 or 0.2 °C.
Calorimetry relies on the fact that it takes 4.18 J of energy to increase the temperature of 1 g of water by 1
°C. The energy required to raise the temperature of 1 g of a substance by 1 °C (1 K) is called the specific


heat capacity, c, of the liquid. So, the specific heat capacity of water is
The energy transferred as heat is given by the relationship:
q
where:
q is the heat transferred, in J
m is the mass of water, ing
cis the specific heat capacity, in}


AT is the temperature change, in °C
As 1 cm? of water weighs 1 g, we can substitute volume of water in cm? of water for mass of water in g in

the equation. Aqueous solutions of acids, alkalis and salts are assumed to be largely water.

With solutions we make the assumptions that:

¢ of solution has a mass of 1 g


the solution has the same specific heat capacity as water.
The heat transferred for a known number of moles of reactants in the calorimeter is given by


q
We can scale this up to get the enthalpy change per mole of defined reactant or product. The relationship


we then use is


AH = —mcAT
Note: A rise in temperature is given a positive sign. So the value of AH is negative for an exothermic
reaction. A fall in temperature is given a negative sign. So the value of AH is positive for an endothermic


reaction.


IMPORTANT
The energy released in calorimetry experiments for a known number of moles of a specified reactant is


given by q = mcAT.
When we multiply this up to 1 mole of a stated product or reactant, the equation we use is


AH = —mcAT


The negative sign shows that the reaction is exothermic.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 6.1


 


The enthalpy change of neutralisation by experiment
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
We can find the enthalpy change of neutralisation of sodium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid by
mixing equal volumes of known equimolar concentrations of acid and alkali together in a polystyrene


cup.
Procedure
50 of 1.0 mol hydrochloric acid in the cup and record its temperature.


2 Add 50 cm? of 1.0 mol sodium hydroxide (at the same temperature) to the acid in the cup.

Stir the reaction mixture with the thermometer and record the highest temperature.
In this experiment most of the heat is transferred to the solution, as the polystyrene cup is a good
insulator. Cooling of the warm solution is not a great problem: the reaction is rapid so the maximum
temperature is reached before much cooling of the warm solution has occurred. However, there are
still heat losses to the air and to the thermometer, which make the result less exothermic than the


data book value of —57.1


Specimen results and calculation
mass of solution =


(50 cm? of acid plus 50 cm? of alkali and assuming that 1.0 cm? of solution has a mass of 1.0 g)
specific heat capacity = 4.18 J

(assuming that the heat capacity of the solution is the same as the heat capacity of water)
starting temperature = 21.3 °C reactant solutions
final temperature = 27.8 °C product solution


temperature rise = +6.5 °C
(use the relationship q = mcAT )


heat energy released = 100 x 4.18 x 6.5 =
At the start, the reaction mixture contained 50 cm? of 1.0 mol hydrochloric acid and 50 cm? of
1.0 mol sodium hydroxide. The number of moles of each (and of the water formed) is calculated


using
concentration x volume (in cm?) 1.0 x 50
1000 1000


= 0.050 moles

So 2717 J of energy was released by 0.050 moles of acid.
Therefore, for one mole of acid (forming one mole of water) the energy released was


2717
= 54 340)


= —54 kj (to 2 significant figures)


The negative sign shows that the reaction is exothermic.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 6.2


 


Finding the enthalpy change of combustion of propan-1-ol
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
We can find the enthalpy change of combustion by burning a known mass of substance and using the
heat released to raise the temperature of a known mass of water. The apparatus used for this consists


of a spirit burner and a metal calorimeter (Figure 6.6).


thermometer


clamp



   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


          
metal


calorimeter


water


shield
wick


spirit burner
alkane or cap for
alcohol burner


fuel


Figure 6.6: A simple apparatus used to find the enthalpy change of combustion of fuels.


 


Procedure
Weigh the spirit burner containing propan-1-ol. The cap on the burner must be kept on when the


burner is not lit to avoid evaporation of the fuel.
Pour 100 (100 g) of water into the calorimeter. For greater accuracy this should be weighed out.


Stir the water and record its temperature with a thermometer reading to at least the nearest 0.1 °C.
Place the spirit burner beneath the calorimeter, remove the cap and light the wick. The length of the
wick should have been previously adjusted so that the material of the wick does not burn and the


flame just touches the bottom of the calorimeter.
Keep stirring the water with the thermometer until there is a temperature rise of about 10 °C. Record


this temperature.
Remove the spirit burner, place the cap on it and reweigh it.


To find the standard enthalpy change of combustion we need to know:
e the mass of fuel burnt
e the temperature rise of the water


e the mass of the water


e the relative molecular mass of the fuel (propan-1-ol).


Specimen results and calculation
mass of water in calorimeter
mass of spirit burner and propan-1-ol at start = 86.27g
mass of spirit burner and propan-1-ol at end =
mass of propan-1-ol burnt =0.21g
initial temperature of water = 20.2 °C
final temperature of water = 30.9 °C


temperature change of the water = +10.7 °C
Using the relationship q = mcAT (mass of water x specific heat capacity of water x temperature


change):
energy released by burning 0.21 g propanol


= x 4.18 x 10.7) =


the mass of 1 mole of propan-1-ol, C3H7OH, is 60 g
so for 60 g propan-1-ol the energy released AH@ is


— 4472.6 x


AH€ = kJ (to 2 significant figures)
This is much less than the data book value of —2021 kJ mainly due to heat losses to the


surroundings.


 


Questions
4 Calculate the energy transferred when the temperature of 75 cm? of water rises from 23 °C to 54



b 8 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 40 cm? of water, the temperature falls from 22 °C to


20.5 °C. Calculate the energy absorbed by the solution when sodium chloride dissolves.
added 50 cm? of sodium hydroxide to 50 cm? of hydrochloric acid. Both solutions were
at 18 °C to start with. When the solutions were mixed a reaction occurred. The temperature rose


to 33 °C. How much energy is released in this reaction?
5 why the enthalpy change of neutralisation of one mole of sulfuric acid, is not the


standard enthalpy change of neutralisation in
6 Astudent added 10 g (0.25 mol) of sodium hydroxide to 40 cm? of water to make a concentrated
solution. All the sodium hydroxide dissolved. The student measured the maximum temperature rise.
The student suggested that these results would give an accurate value for the standard enthalpy


change of solution. Give two reasons why the student is incorrect.

Astudent calculated the standard enthalpy change of combustion of ethanol AH® by
calorimetry as —870 The data book value is —1367 Explain why there is a
difference between these values.


6.4 Hess’s law


Conserving energy
The law of conservation of energy states that ‘energy cannot be created or destroyed’. This is also called


the first law of thermodynamics.
The first law of thermodynamics also applies to chemical reactions: the total energy of the chemicals and
their surroundings must remain constant. In 1840, Germain Hess applied the law of conservation of energy


to enthalpy changes.
law states that ‘the total enthalpy change in a chemical reaction is independent of the route by
which the chemical reaction takes place as long as the initial and final conditions are the same’. The states


of the reactants and products must also be the same whichever route is followed.


Enthalpy cycles (Energy cycles)


   



    


 


A+B


 


 


direct route


 


 


 


 


Figure 6.7: The enthalpy change is the same no matter which route is followed.


 
We can illustrate Hess’s law by drawing enthalpy cycles. These are often called energy cycles or Hess


cycles. In Figure 6.7, the reactants A and B combine directly to form C. This is the direct route.
Two indirect routes are also shown. One other way of changing A + B to C is to convert A + B into different


substances F + G (intermediates), which then combine to form C.
law tells us that the enthalpy change of reaction for the direct route is the same as for the indirect


route. It does not matter how many steps there are in the indirect route. We can still use Hess’s law.
We can use law to calculate enthalpy changes that cannot be found by experiments using
calorimetry. For example, the enthalpy change of formation of propane cannot be found by direct


experiment because hydrogen does not react with carbon under standard conditions.


IMPORTANT
You may be asked to draw an energy cycle. This is just another way of describing an enthalpy cycle or


Hess cycle. Energy cycle is the more general term.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


reactants products


 


 


elements


 
Figure 6.8: An enthalpy cycle (energy cycle) for calculating an enthalpy change of reaction. The dashed line shows the


indirect (two-step) route.


 


Enthalpy change of reaction from enthalpy changes of formation
We can calculate the enthalpy change of reaction by using the type of enthalpy cycle (energy cycle) shown


in Figure 6.8.
We use the enthalpy changes of formation of the reactants and products to calculate the enthalpy change
of the reaction. We take note of the directions of the arrows to find the one-stage (direct) and two-stage


(indirect) routes. When we use law we see that:


AH, = AH, +
direct route indirect route


So AH, =
To calculate the enthalpy change of reaction using this type of enthalpy cycle, we use the following


procedure:


write the balanced equation at the top
draw the cycle with elements at the bottom


draw in all arrows, making sure they go in the correct directions


apply Hess’s law, taking into account the number of moles of each reactant and product.
If there are 3 moles of a product, e.g. we must multiply the enthalpy change of formation by 3.


Also remember that the standard enthalpy change of formation of an element in its standard state is zero.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
the standard enthalpy change for the reaction:
2NaHCO3(s) + CO>(g) +
Solution
The relevant enthalpy changes of formation are:
AH? = —950.8
=
AH? [CO2(g)] = —393.5 kj
AH, = —285.8 kj


The enthalpy cycle is shown in Figure 6.9.


+ +


 


 



(
2



2


 


2Na(s) + 2C(graphite) + 302(g) + H2(g)


 


 
Figure 6.9: The enthalpy cycle for the decomposition of sodium hydrogencarbonate. The dashed line shows the two-


step route.


 
Step 1: Apply Hess’s law.
AH, = AH, + AH,
= + AHP +


= [NaHCO(s)] + AH?

Step 2: Insert the values of AH taking care to multiply by the correct number of moles.
+ (—393.5) + = + AHS


—1810.0 = —1901.6 + AH,
Step 3: Rearrange the figures to make AH, the subject.
So = — (—1901.6)
= +91.6 kj (for the equation shown)


Note:
e the value for [NaHCO(s)] is multiplied by 2 because 2 moles of NaHCO3 appear in the


equation
the values for AH? [Na,CO3(s)], and AH? are added together to give


Take care to account for the fact that some values may be positive and some negative.


 


 


 


 


 
AH;
elements + oxygen formed +


AH,


 


 


combustion products


Figure 6.10: An enthalpy cycle for calculating an enthalpy change of formation from enthalpy changes of combustion.


 


IMPORTANT


When doing enthalpy cycle (energy cycle) calculations remember that:


enthalpy change of an element in its normal state is zero
must take into account the number of moles of reactants and products in each part of the


energy cycle.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 

2 Calculate the standard enthalpy change of formation of ethane,
Solution
The relevant enthalpy changes of combustion are:


C(graphite) +


AH® [C(graphite)] = —393.5
+


AH® = —285.8

+ 3 +
AH® = kj


Step 1: Write the enthalpy change of formation at the top and then draw the energy cycle with
the combustion products at the bottom. Make sure the arrows are in the correct


direction.


The enthalpy cycle is shown in Figure 6.11.


Step 2: Apply law.
AH, = AH; + AH2
Step 3: Insert the values of AH taking care to multiply by the correct number of moles.
AH, = AH; +
+ = AH; +


—1644.4 = AH; + (—1559.7)
Step 4: Rearrange the figures to make AH; the subject.


AH; = —1644.4 — (—1559.7) = —84.7 kj


 
AH;


2C(graphite) + + +


 
  


 
\ AH,


+ 3AH2[H2(g)]


2C0,(g) +
Figure 6.11: The enthalpy cycle to find the enthalpy change of formation of ethane using enthalpy changes of


combustion. The dashed line shows the two-step route.


 


 


Question
8 Draw an enthalpy cycle to calculate AH® for the reaction
+ > 2Fe(s) +
b AH, using the following information:


AH? = —824.2 kj


AH? [Al203(s)] = —1675.7 kj


Enthalpy change of formation from enthalpy changes of combustion
We can calculate the enthalpy change of formation of many compounds by using the type of enthalpy cycle


shown in Figure 6.10.
We use the enthalpy changes of combustion of the reactants and products to calculate the enthalpy
change of formation. When we take note of the direction of the arrows to find the one-stage (direct) and


two-stage (indirect) routes and use Hess’s law we see that:
AH, = AH;+ AH,
direct route indirect route
So AH; = AH; —
To calculate the enthalpy change of formation using this type of cycle:
write the equation for enthalpy change of formation at the top; add oxygen on both sides of the
equation to balance the combustion reactions
e draw the cycle with the combustion products at the bottom


draw in all arrows, making sure they go in the correct directions


apply Hess’s law, taking into account the number of moles of each reactant and product.

 
Remember that in constructing enthalpy cycles (energy cycles) to calculate AH;, AH, or the


| reaction required is put at the top of the energy cycle triangle.


Questions
9 enthalpy cycle to calculate the enthalpy change of formation of ethanol, using


enthalpy changes of combustion.
a value for AH; using the following data:
AH® [C(graphite)] = —393.5
AH® =


AH® = —1367.3
10 Look at this equation.


+ Fe203(s) 2Fe(s) + 3MgO(s)


Which one of the following gives the correct value for the enthalpy change of this reaction?
= AH; — 3AH; [MgO(s)]


= AH; — [Fe203(s)]
© AH, = 2AH; [Fe(g)] +


— 3AH; [Mg(g)] + AH;


D AH, = 3AH; [MgO(s)] — AH;


6.5 Bond energies and enthalpy changes


IMPORTANT


 


Remember that bond breaking is endothermic and bond making is exothermic.


Bond breaking and bond making
Enthalpy changes are due to the breaking and forming of bonds. Breaking bonds requires energy. The
energy is needed to overcome the attractive forces joining the atoms together. Energy is released when


new bonds are formed. Bond breaking is endothermic and bond forming is exothermic.


In a chemical reaction:
if the energy needed to break bonds is than the energy released when new bonds are formed, the


reaction will release energy and is exothermic.
if the energy needed to break bonds is more than the energy released when new bonds are formed,


the reaction will absorb energy and is endothermic.
We can draw reaction pathway diagrams to show these changes (Figure 6.12). In reality, not all the bonds
in a compound are broken and then re-formed during a reaction. In most reactions only some of the bonds


in the reactants are broken and then new bonds are formed in a specific sequence.


Bond energy
The amount of energy needed to break a specific covalent bond is called the bond dissociation energy. We


sometimes call this the exact bond energy or bond enthalpy.


 


 
 
         


   


 


 


 


 
ba
2H + 2Br

H bond forming
H-C-H + bond
bond breaking
2 forming +
=
released H-Br energy
H-Br absorbed
>


Reaction pathway Reaction pathway
Figure 6.12: a An energy level diagram showing bond breaking and bond forming for the combustion of methane
(exothermic). b An energy level diagram showing bond breaking and bond forming for the decomposition of hydrogen


bromide (endothermic).


 
The symbol for bond energy is E. We put the type of bond broken in brackets after the symbol.


So E(C-H) refers to the bond energy of a mole of single bonds between carbon and hydrogen atoms.
The bond energy for double and triple bonds refers to a mole of double or triple bonds. Two examples of


equations relating to bond energies are:
> 2Br(g) = +193
20(g) = +498

The values of bond energies are always positive (endothermic) because they refer to bonds being broken.
When new bonds are formed the amount of energy released is the same as the amount of energy absorbed
when the same type of bond is broken. So, for the formation of oxygen molecules from oxygen atoms:


20(g) > O2(g) = —498 k}


Average bond energy
Bond energy is affected by other atoms in the molecule. The O-H bond in water has a slightly different
bond energy value to the O-H bond in ethanol. In ethanol, the oxygen is connected to a carbon atom
rather than another hydrogen atom. We call these bond energies exact bond energies. The O-H bond is in
a different environment. Identical bonds in molecules with two (or more) types of bond have different bond
energies when we measure them. It takes more energy to break the first O-H bond in water than to break
the second. For these reasons we use average bond energies taken from a number of bonds of the same


type but in different environments.
We cannot usually find the value of bond energies directly, so we have to use an enthalpy cycle. The
average bond energy of the C-H bond in methane can be found using the enthalpy changes of


atomisation of carbon and hydrogen and the enthalpy change of combustion or formation of methane.


IMPORTANT


The standard enthalpy change of atomisation, is the enthalpy change when one mole of


gaseous atoms is formed from its element under standard conditions. So, relates to the


equation H(g)


 


 
    


    


C(g) + 4H(g)


 


 


 


[(graphite)]


+


 


C(graphite) + 2H2(g)
Figure 6.13: An enthalpy cycle to find the average bond energy of the bond. The dashed line shows the two-step


route.


 
The enthalpy cycle for calculating the average bond energy is shown in Figure 6.13. Using the
enthalpy cycle shown in Figure 6.13, the average bond energy can be found by dividing the value of


AH on the diagram by four (because there are four bonds in a molecule of methane).


Question
Use the information in Figure 6.13 and the information below to demonstrate that the average bond


energy of the C-H bond is 415.9
= kJ mol
1


AHS = +218 kJ


[C(graphite)] = +716.7
6.6 Calculating enthalpy changes using bond


energies
We can use bond energies to calculate the enthalpy change of a reaction that we cannot measure directly.


For example, the reaction for the Haber process (see Section 8.5):
+ 3H2(g) =
The enthalpy cycle for this reaction is shown in Figure 6.14. The relevant bond energies are:
E(N=N) = 945 kj
E(H-H) = 436 kj


E(N-H) = 391 kj
AH?
N= + 3H— H(g) > 2H— N— H(g)


H



   


    


2x
  


 



+3x


2N(g) +


Figure 6.14: The enthalpy cycle for ammonia synthesis. The dashed line shows the two-step route.


 


It is often easier to set out the calculation as a balance sheet, as shown below:
1 x x 945 = 945 6 x N-H = 6 x 391
3 x H-H — 3 x 436 = 1308


total = +2253 total = —2346


Note in these calculations that:


 
one triple bond in nitrogen is broken


three single bonds in hydrogen are broken
e six single bonds in hydrogen are formed (because each of the two ammonia molecules has three


N-H bonds)
values for bond breaking are positive, as these are endothermic, and values for bond forming are


negative, as these are exothermic.
From the enthalpy cycle in Figure 6.14:


AH, = + AH>
AH, = enthalpy change for bonds broken
+ enthalpy change for bonds formed
AH, = 2253 + (—2346) = —93


Questions


12 The equation for the combustion of ethanol is:

+ > +
this equation to show all the bonds in the reactants and products.



the following bond energies (in kJ to calculate a value for the standard enthalpy


change of this reaction:
i E(C-C) = +347
ii E(C-H) = +410
iii = +336
E(O=0) = +496
= +805


vi = +465
The standard enthalpy change of combustion of ethanol is Suggest why this


value differs from the value obtained using bond energies.
Look at this equation.
CH,(g) + +


Which one of the following statements is completely correct?
four C-H bonds and two bonds are broken (exothermic) reaction and two C=O bonds and four


O-H bonds are formed (endothermic)
four C-H bonds and two bonds are broken (endothermic) and two C=O bonds and four


bonds are formed (exothermic)
C-H bonds and two bonds are broken (endothermic) and two C—O bonds and four


bonds are formed (exothermic)
D_ four C-H bonds and two bonds are broken (endothermic) and two C=O bonds and two O-H


bonds are formed (exothermic)


REFLECTION
Work with another learner to make a list of differences between the definitions of the standard
enthalpy changes of formation, reaction, combustion and neutralisation as well as any differences


in the way that you draw the energy cycle diagrams.
Work with another learner to describe the sequence of operations in one of the experiments that
appear in this chapter, e.g. deducing enthalpy change of combustion or deducing the enthalpy
change of reaction. Think about what you would need to measure and the variables you would
need to control. What equations would you need to use when processing the results? What would


you change if you had to do this again?


 


SUMMARY


Exothermic enthalpy changes have negative AH values. Endothermic enthalpy changes have positive AH values.
Enthalpy changes can be calculated experimentally using the relationship:
enthalpy change, = mass of liquid x specific heat capacity x temperature change.
For a mole of defined substance this is written AH = —mcAT


Standard enthalpy change of formation relates to the enthalpy change when one mole of a compound is formed
from its elements under standard conditions. Similar definitions can be written for standard enthalpy changes of


combustion and reaction.
law can be used to calculate enthalpy changes for reactions that do not occur directly or cannot be found by


experiment.


Bond breaking is endothermic; bond making is exothermic.
Average bond energies are often used because the strength of a bond between two particular types of atom is

slightly different in different compounds.



 


 


nitrate decomposes on heating. The reaction is endothermic.
2CuO(s) + 4NO3(g) +


[3]
a reaction pathway diagram for this reaction to include the activation energy.
an energy cycle to calculate the standard enthalpy change for this reaction, using [3]
enthalpy changes of formation.
Calculate the enthalpy change for this reaction using the following enthalpy changes of
formation.
AH? [Cu(NO3)2(s)] = —302.9
[CuO(s)] = —157.3
3
[NO2(g)] = +33.2 kj
sulfate is soluble in water. A student dissolved 25.0 g of sulfate in
100 of water in a polystyrene beaker stirring all the time. The temperature of the
water fell by 2.9 °C.
i Calculate the enthalpy change of solution of sulfate. (specific heat
capacity of water = 4.18 J relative molecular mass of sulfate = [3]
249.7 g
ii one source of error in this experiment and explain how the error affects the [2]
results.
[Total: 14]
is a liquid. It has the structure
H O H
|
H—C—C—C—H
|
H H
The equation for the complete combustion of propanone is:
+ 402(g) +
the following bond energies (in to calculate a value for the standard
enthalpy change of this reaction:
E(C-C) = +347
E(C-H) = +413
= +496
= +805
[4]
E(O-H) = +465
Explain why it would be more accurate to use exact bond energies rather than average [2]
bond energies in this calculation.
standard enthalpy change of combustion of propanone is —1816.5 Suggest [2]
why this value differs from the value obtained using bond energies.


standard enthalpy change of formation of propanone is —248 kJ
3


i Define the term standard enthalpy change of formation. (3]
ii the equation that describes the standard enthalpy change of formation of [2]


propanone.
Explain why the enthalpy change of formation of propanone cannot be found by a


single experiment.


[Total: 14]
cm? of ethane was burnt in a controlled way and found to raise the
temperature of 100 cm? of water by 33.5 °C. (specific heat capacity of water = 4.18) 1


mol of gas molecules occupies 24.0 dm? at r.t.p.)


b
6 a

b
1
Calculate the number of moles of ethane that were burned.
2
Calculate the heat change, q, for the experiment.
Calculate the molar enthalpy change of combustion for ethane, as measured by this [2]
experiment.
Use the values below to calculate the standard molar enthalpy change for the complete
combustion of ethane.
AH? [CO2] = —394
AH? [H20] = —286 kj
[4]
AH? ] = —85
2
Give possible reasons for the difference between the two results. (2]
[Total: 11]
[3]
Define standard enthalpy change of combustion.
i When red phosphorus burns in oxygen the enthalpy change is —2967 For
white phosphorus the enthalpy change is —2984 For both forms of
phosphorus the reaction taking place is:
+ 502(g) >
Use this information to calculate the enthalpy change for the transformation: [5]
>
[3]
ii Represent these changes on an energy level diagram.
[Total: 11]
[3]
Define standard enthalpy change of formation.
Calculate the standard enthalpy change of formation of methane from the following
standard enthalpy changes of combustion:
carbon = —394 kj
hydrogen = —286 [4]
methane = —891 kj
Calculate the standard enthalpy change of combustion of methane using the following
bond energies:
E(C-H) = +412 kj
E(O=0) = +496
E(C=O) = +805
E(O-H) = +463 kj
[Total: 11]
[2]
Define average bond energy.
Use the average bond energies that follow to calculate a value for the enthalpy change
for the reaction:
+ Ip > 2HI
E(H-H) = +436 kj
E(I-l) = +151 kj
[3]
= +299



c Represent these changes on an energy level diagram. [3]


[Total: 8]
3
7 Define standard enthalpy change of reaction.
Given the enthalpy changes AH, and below, construct a Hess’s cycle that will enable
you to find the enthalpy change, AH,, for the reaction:
MgCO3(s) > MgO(s) + AH,
MgCO3(s) + + + AH,


4


MgO(s) + +
[Total: 7]

8 an experiment, a spirit burner is used to heat 250 cm? of water by burning methanol
(CH30H). (A, values: C = 12.0, H = 1.0, O = 16.0; specific heat capacity of water = 4.18

J

Results:

starting temperature of water = 20.0 °C

starting mass of burner + fuel = 248.8 g


final temperature of water = 43.0 °C

final mass of burner + fuel =

the energy in joules that went into heating the water. [2]

b the number of moles of fuel burned.
Calculate an experimental value for the enthalpy change of combustion of methanol [2]


from these results.


d three reasons why your answer is much smaller than the accepted standard [3]
enthalpy of combustion of methanol.


[Total: 9]


SELF-EVALUATION


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs more Almost Ready to


section... work there move on
explain and use the term enthalpy change (AH) and apply it to
exothermic chemical reactions (AH is negative) and


endothermic chemical reactions (AH is positive)
construct and interpret a reaction pathway diagram in terms


of enthalpy changes and activation energy

define and use the term standard conditions

define and use the term enthalpy change of formation

define and use the term enthalpy change of combustion

define and use the term enthalpy change of neutralisation
explain energy transfers during chemical reactions in terms of


bond breaking (endothermic) and bond making (exothermic)


use bond energies to calculate enthalpy change of reaction
understand that some bond energies are exact and some bond


energies are averages
calculate enthalpy changes from experimental results,
including the use of the relationships: q = mcAT and AH =


—mcAT


use law to construct simple energy cycles
carry out calculations using energy cycles to determine


enthalpy changes that cannot be found by direct experiment

carry out calculations using bond energy data.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START


 
Write down as many definitions of oxidation and reduction as you can. Compare your definitions
with other learners. Were there any definitions that you left out? Discuss with another learner


which definitions of oxidations and reduction are generally most useful.


2 Get another learner to select an oxidation—reduction (redox) equation from a textbook. Explain to
the other learner how you know which compound or element has been oxidised and which has


been reduced. Then reverse the process: you choose and the other learner explains.
Make a list of oxidising agents and reducing agents. Compare your list with others in the class.


Were there any obvious ones that you missed out?
4 know any qualitative tests for oxidising agents and reducing agents? Write them down and


compare your ideas with the rest of the class. Check in a textbook to confirm the tests.
Take turns in challenging a partner to balance some of the equations from Chapter 3 in this
coursebook. Your partner looks in the book for an equation then writes the equation down without
the large numbers in front of each element or compound. You then try to balance the equation.
How well did you do? Take turns in doing this until you are sure that you can balance these


equations.


6 Nowtry thing to the challenge directly above but select ionic equations.
7 Write down a list of compounds that include oxidation numbers as roman numerals, e.g. (Il), (IV).


Compare your list with the others in the class.


SELF-DARKENING LENSES


 


Figure 7.1: These photochromic lenses darken in strong light.


 
Glass has an open network structure of covalently bonded silicon and oxygen atoms. If we add a very
small amount of silver chloride and chloride to the glass, we can alter its properties so that it
remains transparent in weak light but darkens in strong light. This photochromic glass can be used to
make spectacle lenses that get darker and darker when more and more ultraviolet light is absorbed
(Figure 7.1). The silver chloride and copper(!) chloride are present at such a low concentration that the


glass is transparent to light.
When the light is strong, the ultraviolet radiation causes a redox reaction between the silver ions and


the copper(I) ions.


Ag*(s) + Cut(s) > Ag(s) +
The silver produced reflects the light from the glass so less light is transmitted and the lenses darken.
Less ultraviolet light gets to the eyes. This is important because too much ultraviolet light has been
linked to damage to the retina of the eye, cataracts (cloudiness of the lens of the eye) and skin cancer.
When we move back into the shade, the ions oxidise the silver back to silver ions and the
lenses become transparent again. The darkening process in bright light takes less than one minute but
the reverse process takes from 2—5 minutes. The speed of this redox reaction depends on the
temperature. At very high temperatures the glasses darken more quickly but do not achieve the full
protection of ordinary sunglasses. At very low temperatures the lenses darken more slowly but


become relatively darker. However, they take a longer time to go clear again.
More recently, photochromic plastic lenses have been introduced that depend on the change in
structure of complex molecules instead of redox reactions.

Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:



e What are the advantages and disadvantages of photochromic lenses made of glass compared with


sunglasses?


Give some the advantages and disadvantages of using photochromic glasses


e weather


e in hot weather


 


7.1 What is a redox reaction?
A simple definition of oxidation is ‘gain of oxygen by an element’. For example, when magnesium reacts
with oxygen, the magnesium combines with oxygen to form magnesium oxide. Magnesium has been


oxidised.


2Mg(s) + 2MgO(s)
A simple definition of reduction is ‘loss of oxygen’. When copper(II) oxide reacts with hydrogen, this is the


equation for the reaction:
CuO(s) + H2(g) Cu(s) +


oxide loses its oxygen. oxide has been reduced.
But if we look carefully at the copper oxide / hydrogen equation, we can see that oxidation is also taking
place. The hydrogen is gaining oxygen to form water. The hydrogen has been oxidised. We can see that


reduction and oxidation have taken place together.
Oxidation Is Loss of electrons.


Reduction Is Gain of electrons.
The initial letters shown in bold capitals spell OIL RIG. This may help you to remember these two


definitions!
Oxidation and reduction always take place together. We call the reactions in which this happens redox
reactions. Redox reactions are very important. For example, one redox reaction — photosynthesis —


provides food for the entire planet, and another one — respiration — keeps you alive.
We can also define reduction as addition of hydrogen to a compound and oxidation as removal of hydrogen


from a compound. This is often seen in the reaction of organic compounds (see Chapter 14).
There are two other ways of finding out whether or not a substance has been oxidised or reduced during a


chemical reaction:


electron transfer

changes in oxidation number.

Question
of the following equations, state which reactant has been oxidised:
i PbO + > Pb + H20
ii CO+Ag,0 > 2Ag + CO,

iii 2Mg +


each of the following equations, state which reactant has been reduced:
i 5CO + 1,02 + Ip


ii + +


+ Hy >


Redox and electron transfer
Half-equations

We can extend our definition of redox to include reactions involving ions.
Sodium reacts with chlorine to form the ionic compound sodium chloride.


2Na(s) +
We can divide this reaction into two separate equations, one showing oxidation and the other showing


reduction. We call these half-equations.


When sodium reacts with chlorine:
Each sodium atom loses one electron from its outer shell. Oxidation is loss of electrons (OIL). The
sodium atoms have been oxidised.
Na > Na* + e7
This half-equation shows that sodium is oxidised.
We could also write this half-equation as:


Na >
Each chlorine atom gains one electron to complete its outer shell. Reduction is gain of electrons (RIG).


The chlorine atoms have been reduced.
+ >
This half-equation shows chlorine being reduced. There are two chlorine atoms in a chlorine molecule,


so two electrons are gained.
In another example, iron reacts with copper(II) ions, Cu2*, in solution to form iron(II) ions, and copper.

Fe(s) + Cu2+(aq) > + Cu(s)
ach iron atom loses two electrons to form an ion. The iron atoms have been oxidised.
Fe > +
We could also write this half-equation as:


Fe —


Each ion gains two electrons. The copper ions have been reduced.


+ > Cu


Balancing half-equations
We can construct a balanced ionic equation from two half-equations by balancing the numbers of electrons
lost and gained and then adding the two half-equations together. The numbers of electrons lost and gained


in a redox reaction must be equal.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
the balanced ionic equation for the reaction between nickel and ions, from


the half-equations:
Solution
Ni(s) Ni2*(aq) +


+ e~ >
Each Ni atom loses two electrons when it is oxidised. Each ion gains one electron when it is


reduced.
e So two ions are needed to gain the two electrons lost when each ion is formed
2Fe3+(aq) + >
Ni(s) + 2e7
The balanced ionic equation is:
Ni(s) + 2Fe3*(aq) > Ni2*(aq) +


Note how the electrons have cancelled out.


the balanced ionic equation for the reaction of iodide ions (I~) with ions


in the presence of hydrogen ions (Ht). Use the following two half-equations to help you:
> + (i)
+ 8H*(aq) + + (ii)


Solution
e When two iodide ions are oxidised, they lose two electrons. Each ion gains five electrons


when it is reduced.


must multiply equation i by 5 and equation ii by 2 to balance the number of electrons:


> + 10e7


+ 16H*(aq) + > 2Mn?*(aq) +


e The balanced ionic equation is:
+ + 16H*(aq) >


+ +


 


Question
2 Write two half-equations for the following reactions. For each half-equation state whether


oxidation or reduction is occurring.




+ >
b metal reacts with ions in acidic solution. Construct a balanced ionic equation for this


reaction, using the two half-equations below:

+ 12H* + > |p +
Zn > +


7.2 Oxidation numbers


What are oxidation numbers?
We can extend our definition of redox even further to include oxidation and reduction in reactions involving
covalent compounds. We do this by using oxidation numbers (oxidation numbers are also called oxidation
states). An oxidation number is a number given to each atom or ion in a compound that shows us its
degree of oxidation. Oxidation numbers can be positive, negative or zero. The + or — sign must always be
included. Higher positive oxidation numbers mean that an atom or ion is more oxidised. Higher negative
oxidation numbers mean that an atom or ion is more reduced. Figure 7.2 shows magnesium (oxidation
number 0) attached to the hull of a ship. It prevents the hull rusting by sacrificial protection when it
releases electrons. During this process, the oxidation number of magnesium changes from 0 (in Mg metal )


to +2 in the Mg2* ion.


 
Figure 7.2: This is part of a ship’s hull. It is made of iron protected by bars of magnesium metal. The magnesium atoms
(oxidation number = 0) are oxidised to ions (oxidation number = +2) in preference to iron atoms changing to Fe3+,


This is called sacrificial protection.


 


Oxidation number rules


IMPORTANT


The more positive (or less negative) the oxidation number, the more oxidised a substance is. The less
positive (or more negative) the oxidation number, the more reduced a substance is. Take care with
negative oxidation numbers: Remember that an ox. no. of —3 is less oxidised / more reduced than an


ox. no. of —2.


 
We can deduce the oxidation number of any atom or ion by oxidation number rules. It is important to note


that an oxidation number refers to a single atom in a compound.
The oxidation number of any uncombined element is zero. For example, the oxidation numbers of each


atom in Sg, and Zn is zero.
2 In compounds many atoms or ions have fixed oxidation numbers:
Group 1 elements are always +1
Group 2 elements are always +2
is always —1


e hydrogen is +1 (except in metal hydrides such as NaH, where it is —1)


oxygen is —2 (except in peroxides, where it is —1, and in where it is +2).
3 The oxidation number of an element in a monatomic ion is always the same as the charge. For example,


is is +3.
4 The sum of the oxidation numbers in a compound is zero.

5 of the oxidation numbers in an ion is equal to the charge on the ion.
6 a compound or an ion, the more electronegative element is given the negative oxidation
number.


7.3 Applying the oxidation number rules


In the rest of this chapter we shall use ‘ox. no.’ as an abbreviation for oxidation number.


Compounds of a metal with a non-metal
The metal always has the positive ox. no. and the non-metal has the negative ox. no. For example, in


sodium oxide, Na = +1 and O =
If we do not know the ox. no. of one of the atoms, we can often work it out using the invariable ox. nos. in


rule 2. For example in sodium sulfide:
ox. no. of each Na atom = +1
for two sodium atoms = +2


Na2S has no overall charge, so the total ox. no. is zero (rule 4)


ox. no. of S = —2


Compounds of a non-metal with a non-metal
In compounds containing two different non-metals, the sign of the ox. no. depends on the electronegativity

of each atom (see Section 10.5). The most electronegative element is given the negative sign (rule 6).

Sulfur dioxide,

ox. no. of each O atom = —2


for two oxygen atoms = 2 x (—2) =


SO, has no charge, so the total ox. no. is zero (rule 4)


ox. no. of S = +4

lodine trichloride,
chlorine is more electronegative than iodine, so chlorine is — and iodine is +

ox. no. of each Cl atom =


for three chlorine atoms = 3 x =


IClz has no charge, so the total ox. no. is zero (rule 4)

ox. no. of | = +3

Hydrazine,
nitrogen is more electronegative than hydrogen, so nitrogen is — and hydrogen is +

ox. no. of each H atom = +1 (rule 2)

for four hydrogen atoms = 4 x (+1) = +4


has no charge, so the total ox. no. is zero (rule 4)


ox. no. of two N atoms = —4


ox. no. of each N atom = —2


Compound ions


Compound ions are ions with two or more different atoms. Examples are the sulfate ion, SO,2~, and the

nitrate ion, NO3~. We use rule 5 to work out the ox. no. that we do not know.

Nitrate ion,

ox. no. of each O atom = —2


for three oxygen atoms = 3 x (—2) =
has a charge of 1-, so the total ox. no. of N and O atoms is —1 (rule 5)


ox. no. of the nitrogen atom plus ox. no. of the three oxygen atoms (—6) =


ox. no. of N= +5
IMPORTANT


Remember:


the oxidation number refers to a single atom or ion in a compound


the oxidation number of an element is zero, e,g. for Al, Si, Py ox. no.= 0
oxidation numbers are usually whole numbers. In cases where they appear to be fractions it is


because the structure of the compound has not been taken into account.


 


Question

3 the ox. no. of the bold atoms in these compounds or ions:

b

c



e


g


7.4 Redox and oxidation number
We can define oxidation and reduction in terms of the oxidation number changes of particular atoms during


a reaction:
Oxidation is an increase in oxidation number.


Reduction is a decrease in oxidation number.


Figure 7.3 shows a redox reaction between copper and silver nitrate.



  
Figure 7.3: Copper reacts with silver nitrate to form silver and nitrate. The ox. no. of each copper atom has


increased by two. The ox. no. of each silver ion decreases by one.


 
When tin reacts with nitric acid, the oxidation numbers of each atom of tin and nitrogen change as shown


below.


reduction


Sn + SnO, + 4NO, +
oxidation numbers 0 +5 +4


oxidation
Each tin atom (Sn) has increased in ox. no. by +4: tin has been oxidised. Each nitrogen atom has
decreased in ox. no. by —1: nitrogen has been reduced. The ox. no. of each oxygen atom is unchanged at
—2. The ox. no. of each hydrogen atom is unchanged at +1. Oxygen and hydrogen are neither oxidised nor


reduced.
Inthis reaction, nitric acid is acting as an oxidising agent because it increases the oxidation number of


another atom.
reaction, tin is acting as a reducing agent because it decreases the oxidation number of another


atom.


7.5 Oxidising agents and reducing agents
An oxidising agent (oxidant) is a substance which brings about oxidation by removing electrons from


another atom or ion.
An oxidising agent increases the oxidation number of another atom or ion.


When this happens, the oxidation number of the oxidising agent decreases.


Typical oxidising agents are oxygen, chlorine and potassium manganate(VIl).
A reducing agent (reductant) is a substance that brings about reduction by donating (giving) electrons


to another atom or ion.
Areducing agent decreases the oxidation number of another atom or ion.


When this happens, the oxidation number of the reducing agent increases.


Typical reducing agents are hydrogen, potassium iodide and reactive metals such as aluminium.
Since oxidation and reduction occur together, in every redox reaction there must be an oxidising agent and


a reducing agent.


For example, in the reaction given by the equation:


+ + > + +
is the oxidising agent because the oxidation number of Mn decreases from +7 to +2
has increased the oxidation state of iron from +2 to +3


e is the reducing agent because the oxidation number of Fe increases from +2 to +3


has decreased the oxidation state of Mn in from +7 to +2
The ability of a substance to act as a good oxidising or reducing agent depends on its standard electrode
potential (see Section 20.4). Many substances can act as either oxidising or reducing agents depending on


the substances they are reacting with as well as the conditions.


For example, hydrogen peroxide can act as an oxidising agent or a reducing agent.


Oxidising agent


 
ox.no + H,O, + 2Ht 2Fe** + H,O


+42 +3


Reducing agent


 
+ + +
+3 -1 +2 0


Question
4 Deduce the change in ox. no. for the bold atoms or ions in each of the following equations. In


each case, state whether oxidation or reduction has taken place.
+ Bry +
> + +

+ + > + +
the oxidising agent and the reducing agent in parts ai and a iii.


7.6 Naming compounds
We sometimes use Roman numbers, in brackets, to name compounds. We use these systematic names to
distinguish different compounds made of the same elements. For example, there are two types of iron
chloride. We show the difference by naming them chloride and chloride. The numbers in


brackets are the oxidation numbers of the iron.


chloride, the ox. no. of the iron is +2. The compound contains ions. The formula is
chloride, the ox. no. of the iron is +3. The compound contains Fe3* ions. The formula is


FeCl3.


We can also use oxidation numbers to distinguish between non-metal atoms in molecules and ions.


Oxides of nitrogen
There are several oxides of nitrogen, including N30, NO and We distinguish between these according


to the ox. no. of the nitrogen atom. (The ox. no. of oxygen is generally —2.)
The ox. no. of N in is +1. So this compound is oxide.


The ox. no. of N in NO is +2. So this compound is oxide.


The ox. no. of N in is +4. So this compound is oxide.


Nitrate ions
Sodium, nitrogen and oxygen can form two different compounds and (Figure 7.4). The


ox. no. of sodium is +1 and the ox. no. of oxygen is —2. So it is the ox. no. of nitrogen that varies.
The ox. no. of N in the ion is +3. So NaNO is sodium nitrate(III).
The ox. no. of N in the ion is +5. So NaNO3 is sodium nitrate(V).


Note that the ox. no. comes after the ion it refers to.
The names of ions containing oxygen and one other element end in ‘-ate’ (but hydroxide ions, are an
exception to this rule). For example, ions containing chlorine and oxygen are chlorates and ions containing


sulfur and oxygen are sulfates.
The names of inorganic acids containing oxygen end in ‘-ic’. The Roman number goes directly after the ion


that contains the oxygen and another element.


H3PO3 is called phosphoric(IIl) acid because the ox. no. of phosphorus is +3.
is called acid because the ox. no. of chlorine is +7. Salts of the common acids are usually
named without including the ox. no. of the non-metal ion. For example, is magnesium nitrate not
magnesium nitrate(V), and is potassium sulfate not potassium sulfate(VI). Note also that we do not


state the ox. no. of the metal if it has only one oxidation state.


b


Na*


Figure 7.4: a One formula unit of ‘sodium b One formula unit of ‘sodium nitrate(V)’.


 
Question
Give the full systematic names of the following:




e FeSO,
f
g


h


REFLECTION
Work with another learner to work out the oxidation number of M in oxides with the general formula


M,Oy, where x can be any number from 1 to 3 and y can be any number from 1 to 4.
One learner writes the formula for an imaginary oxide using these rules, e.g. MO3. Both then


work together to deduce the ox. no. for M.
Don’t worry if the ox. no. comes out as a fraction: this is only for practice at deducing oxidation


numbers!

What resources did you use? Which were the most helpful?



7.7 From name to formula


You can work out the formula of a compound from its name.


WORKED EXAMPLE
Each formula unit of sodium chlorate(V) contains one sodium ion. What is the formula of sodium


chlorate(V)?

Solution

We know that:

sodium has an ox. no. of +1

oxygen has an ox. no. of —2


the ox. no. of chlorine is +5


the chlorate(V) ion has a charge of (to balance the 1+ charge of the sodium).
We can work out the formula of the chlorate(V) ion from the oxidation numbers of oxygen and


chlorine (let n be the number of oxygen atoms):
ox. no. (Cl) +
+5 + x


n =3


So the chlorate(V) ion is and sodium chlorate(V) is NaClO3.


 
Question
6 the formulae of:
sodium
oxide


chloride.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 7.1


 


Demonstrating a redox reaction
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
We can demonstrate the redox reaction between iron(II) chloride and potassium manganate(VIl) using
qualitative chemical tests. Aqueous potassium is purple in colour. When it reacts with
ions in the presence of excess acid it is usually converted to manganese(II) ions, which appear


colourless at low concentrations.
Procedure
You will need three clean test-tubes and separate dropping pipettes for each solution.


first test-tube, put 1 cm depth of aqueous iron(II) chloride.
2 a dropping pipette, add aqueous sodium hydroxide dropwise until you see a definite


change. Record your observations.


Inthe second test-tube, put 1 cm depth of aqueous chloride.
4 Using a dropping pipette, add aqueous sodium hydroxide dropwise until you see a definite


change. Record your observations.


Inthe third test-tube, put 2 cm depth of aqueous iron(II) chloride.
6 Using a dropping pipette, add aqueous acidified potassium to the solution of


chloride dropwise until you see a definite colour change. Record your observations.
7 Now add aqueous sodium hydroxide to the contents of this tube until you see a further change.


Record your observations.
Use your results to explain how you know that a redox reaction has taken place. Name the oxidising

agent and the reducing agent.




7.8 Balancing chemical equations using oxidation


numbers
We can use oxidation numbers to balance equations involving redox reactions. This method is especially


useful where compound ions such as nitrate(V) or are involved.


IMPORTANT


Remember the steps in constructing equations using oxidation numbers:
identify oxidation number changes
balance oxidation number changes


balance charges


balance atoms.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
4 oxide (CuO) reacts with ammonia (NH3) to form copper, nitrogen and water. Deduce


the balanced equation for this reaction.


Solution
Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation and identify the atoms which change in ox. no.
(shown here in red).
CuO + > Cu + +


2) =3+1 0 0 +1-2


 


Step 2: Deduce the ox. no. changes.


ox. no. change = +3



CuO + Cu+N,+H,0


+2 -3


ox. no. change = -2


Step 3: Balance the ox. no. changes.


ox. no, change = 2 X (+3) = +6


|
3CuO 3Cu + N) + H,0


0 0


ox. no. change = 3 x (-2) = -6
The change in ox. nos. are —2 for the copper and +3 for the nitrogen. To balance
the ox. no. changes, we need to multiply the copper by 3 and the nitrogen in the
ammonia by 2. The total ox. no. changes are then balanced (—6 and +6). Note
that we do not multiply the by 2 because there are already two atoms of


nitrogen present. Once these ratios have been fixed, you must not change them.


Step 4: Balance the atoms.
There are six hydrogen atoms in the 2NH3 on the left. These are balanced with six


on the right (as This also balances the number of oxygen atoms. The final
equation is:


3CuO + 2NH3 3Cu + + 3H20
ions react with ions in the presence of acid (H*) to form Mn?* ions,


Fe3+ and water.
Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation and identify the atoms that change in ox. no.
MnO; + + H* + +


+2 +1 +2 +3


 


 


Step 2: Deduce the ox. no. changes.


ox. no. change = -5


+ Fe?* + H* + +


+7 +2 +2 +3


ox. no. change = +1


Step 3: Balance the ox. no. changes.


ox. no, change = 1 x (-5) = -5


5Fe** + H* > + 5Fe** +


+7 +2 +2 +3


ox. no. change = 5 x (+1) = +5


MnO, + + Ht +
Step 4: Balance the charges.


Initially ignore the hydrogen ions, as these will be used to balance the charges.
The total charge on the other reactants is: (1—) (from + (5 x 2+) (from 5Fe?*)


The total charge on the products is: (2+) (from Mn2*) + (5 x 3+) (from = 17+
To balance the charges we need 8 ions on the left.


+ + >


+ +
Step 5: Balance the hydrogen atoms in the water.
+ +


+ +


 


Question
7 the oxidation number method to balance these equations.


b + + +
+41, +H,0 + Ht


7.9 Disproportionation
The element chlorine (Clz, oxidation number = 0) undergoes a type of redox reaction called
disproportionation when it reacts with alkali. Disproportionation can be thought of as a ‘self-reduction /
oxidation’ reaction. When chlorine reacts with dilute alkali, some chlorine atoms are reduced and some are


oxidised in the same reaction. The actual reaction that takes place depends on the temperature.
When we add chlorine to cold aqueous sodium hydroxide the following disproportionation reaction takes


place:


+ 2NaOH(aq) NaCl(aq) + NaClO(aq) +


sodium
The ionic equation for this redox reaction can be split into two half-equations, showing the reduction and


oxidation.
The reduction reaction is:
1 = =
+ e* Cl
2
ox. no. 0
The change in oxidation number of chlorine is —1
The oxidation reaction is:
+ > + +
ox. no. 0 +1


The change in oxidation number of chlorine is +1


The oxidation numbers are balanced so there are equal numbers of moles of and in the equation.


Balancing equations involving disproportionation
When we add chlorine and hot concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide a different disproportionation
reaction takes place. The products are chloride ions, chlorate(V) ions, and water. Worked


example 6 shows how to balance this disproportionation reaction.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
6 Balance the disproportionation reaction which takes place when chlorine is added to hot


concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide. The products are chloride ions, chlorate(V) ions,
and water.
Solution
Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation and identify the atoms that change in ox. no.
5 + + +
ox. no. 0
Step 2: Deduce the ox. no. changes.
5 is =1
is +5


Step 3: Balance the ox. no. changes.


For each ClO3~ ion formed we need 5 to balance.


+ > + +
Step 4: Balance the charges.


+ + + H2O
Step 5: Balance the chlorine molecules and the water.


+ + +


 
Question
8 at the equation:
+ 2H* + > + +
Which one of these statements about the oxidation number changes is correct?
no. of each Cr atom changes from +12 to +3
The ox. no. of each sulfur atom changes from + 4 to +6
The ox. no. of each hydrogen atom changes from +1 to 0


D


The ox. no. of each Cr atom changes from +7 to +3


REFLECTION


Work with another learner or group of learners.
Each member of the group looks in this coursebook or another textbook for one or two equations
involving redox reactions. You write the equation down but unbalanced. When you have a number of
equations, try balancing them (using the ox. no. method) by working together as a group. You might


start by selecting the equations that seem easier.
How easy was it to balance these equations? Which steps in the balancing do you need to improve?

Did any of your equations turn out not to be redox equations?



SUMMARY
In a redox reaction, both oxidation (increase in oxidation number) and reduction (decrease in oxidation number) are


taking place.
Redox reactions can be explained in terms of electron loss (oxidation) and electron gain (reduction).


Oxidation numbers are used to name compounds and balance equations.


An oxidising agent brings about oxidation by removing electrons from another atom or ion.


A reducing agent brings about reduction by donating electrons to another atom or ion.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
industrial production of nitric acid the following changes take place to the nitrogen.


stage NH; stage NO NO, stage 4


 
Deduce the oxidation number of the nitrogen atom in each molecule.
For each stage, state whether oxidation or reduction has taken place. In each case [2]
explain your answer.
the full systematic name for
d_ Nitric acid, HNO3, reacts with red phosphorus.
P + 5HNO3 > + 5NO, +
By referring to oxidation number changes, explain why this is a redox reaction.


[1]


e Explain why nitric acid can be described as an oxidising agent in this reaction.
[Total: 14]


Calcium reacts with cold water to form calcium hydroxide, and hydrogen,

State the oxidation number of calcium in:
[1]
metal
: [1]

ii calcium hydroxide.
b the oxidation number of hydrogen in:
[1]
i water
[1]

ii hydrogen gas.


c two half-equations for the reaction between water and calcium hydroxide to show:
1
the change from calcium to calcium ions


[1]


ii change from water to hydroxide ions and hydrogen.
State the half-equations in part ¢ in which reduction is occurring. Give a reason for your


answer.
[1]


[1]
Total: 9


The unbalanced equation for the reaction of sulfur dioxide with bromine is shown below.


+ + > + +


Write a balanced equation for the reaction of calcium with water.


f the role played by water in this reaction.


State the oxidation number of sulfur in:
1
i SO,
1
[1]
b the oxidation number of bromine in:
1
[1]
= [1]

1
the reducing agent in this reaction. Give a reason for your answer.
the change in oxidation number for:

[1]



each bromine atom. [1]
2
Construct a balanced equation for this reaction.
[Total: 9]
Aluminium reacts with hydrochloric acid to form aluminium chloride, and
hydrogen. This is a redox reaction.
3
in term of electrons, what is meant by a redox reaction.
1
b Write a half-equation to show aluminium changing to aluminium ions.
ii a second half-equation to show what happens to the hydrogen ions from the
acid.
the change in oxidation number when a hydrogen ion turns into a hydrogen [1]
atom.


Construct a balanced ionic equation for the reaction between aluminium atoms and [1]


hydrogen ions.


[Total: 7]
lodine, reacts with thiosulfate ions, to form iodide ions, and tetrathionate


ions,


lp + > +


State the oxidation number of each sulfur atom in:
i [1]
a ion

ion.
Explain in terms of electron transfer why the conversion of iodine to iodide ions is a
reduction reaction.
c a salt containing iodide ions is warmed with concentrated sulfuric acid and
iodine is evolved:
2I- + MnO, + 6H* + + Mn2* + +
1
the systematic name for
[1]
Deduce the oxidation number of S in the ion.
State which reactant gets oxidised in this reaction. Explain your answer by using [1]
oxidation numbers.


[1]
State which substance is the oxidising agent. Explain your answer.


[Total: 7]
The compound KBrO3 decomposes when heated:


2KBrO3 > 2KBr +

the oxidation numbers of bromine in:

1





ii KBr


3
Explain, using oxidation numbers, why this reaction is a redox reaction. (3]


[1]


the systematic name of KBrO3.


When reacts with hydrazine, nitrogen gas is evolved:


2KBrO3 + 2KBr + +
Deduce the oxidation number change of the bromine atom when KBrO3 is converted


to KBr.


Deduce the oxidation number change for each nitrogen atom when is [2]

converted to
Use your answers to i and ii to explain why 2 moles of KBrO3 react with 3 moles of [3]

[Total: 12]


SELF-EVALUATION
ady tc


wc mc on
deduce oxidation numbers of elements in compounds and ions
explain and use the terms redox, oxidation and reduction in


terms of electron transfer and changes in oxidation number
use Roman numerals to indicate the degree of oxidation or


reduction of an element in a compound.


 


 


images


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START


Take it in turn to explain these chemical terms to another learner:


stoichiometry
a


symbols
mole

standard form
f reversible reaction


position of equilibrium.
Write all that you know about a reaction that is in equilibrium and the factors that affect


equilibrium. Compare your answers with other learners in the class.
In Chapter 3 you did mole calculations, including calculations involving solution concentrations and
gas volumes. Write down all the expressions that you know which connect these things to the


number of moles. Be ready to share your answers with others in the class.
What are the units of volume, pressure and temperature? What a smaller or larger units of these


basic units are commonly used?
Take turns in challenging a partner to convert figures into standard form. Your partner thinks of a
number from 0.00001 to 1 000 000, e.g. 0.0063 or 675 000, and asks you to change this into
standard form. Take turns in doing this until you are sure that you understand the use of standard


form.
Work with another learner to describe and explain what you know about the manufacture of either
ammonia or sulfuric acid and the factors which affect the yield. Be ready to share this with the


class.
Make a list of acids and alkalis together with their formulae. Share your list and formulae with the


rest of the class.
Write down the main points about the pH scale and the colour changes of named indicators in


acidic and alkaline conditions. Compare your answers with other learners in the class.
Discuss these questions with another learner:
What are the differences between a concentrated weak acid and a dilute strong acid?


What is the meaning of the terms neutralisation, indicator, salt, titration?
Work with another learner to describe how you would carry out an acid-alkali titration and process


the results.


IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY!


Figure 8.1: Ammonia plant in Western Australia.


 
Millions of tonnes of ammonia are produced throughout the world every year (Figure 8.1). Ammonia is


used to make fertilisers, nitric acid and nylon.
Ammonia is now made using the Haber process, by combining hydrogen and nitrogen in the presence
of a catalyst. The reaction does not go to completion. It reaches equilibrium when the rates of the
forward and backward reactions are equal. The amount of energy needed to run a complex plant for
making ammonia is huge and over the last 100 years, chemists have been working to bring down the


energy costs and reduce pollution.
Before the Haber process was invented, ammonia was produced by the electric arc processes, which
used cheap hydroelectricity but required a temperature of 3000 °C to work. The energy required per
tonne of ammonia formed was 500 gigajoules (1 gigajoule = 10° J). This and the cyanamide process
for making ammonia produced a lot of polluting waste products. The inefficiency of these processes
encouraged the development of the Haber process for the direct synthesis of ammonia from hydrogen
and nitrogen. This has the advantage of producing pure ammonia but high temperatures and
pressures are still needed. The essential part of this process was to find a suitable catalyst. At first,
osmium was used but this was too difficult to obtain. A catalyst of iron-coated iron oxides was then
developed. This reduced the energy requirement for the process to about 90 gigajoules per tonne of
ammonia. But there were still problems, including pollution problems, because of the use of coal to
provide energy and hydrogen. In addition, energy-inefficient electrolysis was used to produce
hydrogen. By 1960, many ammonia plants had switched to natural gas and used petroleum fractions
to produce hydrogen. This increased the energy efficiency of the whole process even more. In modern
ammonia plants, the efficiency has been further increased so that only about 40 gigajoules are needed
to produce a tonne of ammonia. These plants use ruthenium as a catalyst, which decreases the


operating temperature.


Tonnes of year 45 500 000 12 000 000 10 000 000 8 800 000 5 000 000


Table 8.1: The countries producing the greatest amount of ammonia.


 


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Many chemists are trying to develop ‘greener’ manufacturing processes. Use some of the ideas in
the passage above and any other things you can think of to make a list of things that chemists


could do to develop ‘greener’ manufacturing processes.
Chemists have sometimes been blamed for polluting the environment and using up natural

resources. Is this fair?



8.1 Reversible reactions and equilibrium


Reversible reactions
Some reactions can be reversed. For example, when blue, hydrated sulfate is heated, it loses its


water of crystallisation and changes to white anhydrous copper(II) sulfate (see Figure 8.2).
CuSO,(s) +

hydrated copper(II) sulfate anhydrous copper(II) sulfate

This is called the forward reaction.
When water is added to anhydrous copper(II) sulfate, the reaction is reversed.

CuSO,(s) +


This is called the backward (or reverse) reaction.


We show these two reactions in the same equation by using two half arrows: =


= CuSO,(s) +


 


Figure 8.2: Hydrated copper(II) sulfate (left) and anhydrous sulfate (right).


 
A reaction in which the products can react to re-form the original reactants is called a reversible
reaction. In this case, heating and adding water are not being carried out at the same time. However,
there is a type of chemical reaction in which the forward reaction and the backward reaction take place at


the same time.
In many chemical reactions, the reactants are not used up completely. Some products are formed but the
maximum theoretical yield is not obtained. A mixture of products and reactants is formed. The products
react together to re-form reactants at the same time as the reactants are forming products. This type of
reversible reaction is called an equilibrium reaction. We use the sign = in equilibrium reactions to show


that they are reversible.
For example, consider the reaction between hydrogen and iodine carried out in a sealed glass tube at 400


+ 2HI(g)
Molecules of hydrogen iodide are breaking down to hydrogen and iodine at the same rate as hydrogen and


iodine molecules are reacting together to form hydrogen iodide (see Figure 8.3).

 

9 9



© %


hydrogen atom @ iodine atom


Figure 8.3: A snapshot of the dynamic equilibrium between hydrogen gas, iodine gas and hydrogen iodide gas.


 
When fizzy drinks are made, carbon dioxide gas is dissolved in the drink under pressure. When you take
the lid off a bottle of fizzy drink, bubbles of carbon dioxide suddenly appear. When you put the lid back on,


the bubbles stop. This is because of the equilibrium reaction CO2(g) = CO2(aq)

The forward reaction happens during manufacture and the backward reaction happens on opening.

Characteristics of equilibrium
An equilibrium reaction has four particular features under constant conditions:

is dynamic


forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate
3 concentrations of reactants and products remain constant at equilibrium


4


it requires a closed system.


It is dynamic
The phrase dynamic equilibrium means that the molecules or ions of reactants and products are
continuously reacting. Reactants are continuously being changed to products and products are


continuously being changed back to reactants.


The forward and backward reactions occur at the same rate
At equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the backward reaction. Molecules or ions


of reactants are becoming products, and those in the products are becoming reactants at the same rate.


IMPORTANT


We can get to the equilibrium state by starting from only the reactants or only the products.


At equilibrium, the concentration of products and reactants is constant.
At equilibrium, molecules of reactants are reacting to form molecules of products at the same rate


as molecules of products are reacting to form molecules of reactants.


 


The concentrations of reactants and products remain constant at equilibrium
The concentrations remain constant because, at equilibrium, the rates of the forward and backward


reactions are equal. The equilibrium can be approached from two directions. For example, in the reaction:
+ 2HI(g)


we can start by either:


using a mixture of colourless hydrogen gas and purple iodine vapour, or

using only colourless hydrogen iodide gas.
Figure 8.4 shows what happens when 5.00 x mol of hydrogen molecules and 5.00 x 1073 mol of
iodine molecules react at 500 K in a vessel of volume 1 As time passes, the purple colour of the iodine
vapour fades until equilibrium is reached. At equilibrium the mixture contains 0.68 x mol of iodine,
0.68 x mol of hydrogen and 8.64 x 1073 mol of hydrogen iodide.



and iodine as the
is established


0.68 x


   
Concentration of reagent /


0 Time
Figure 8.4: The changes in the concentrations of reagents as 5.00 x mol of each of hydrogen and iodine react to


form an equilibrium mixture with hydrogen iodide in a vessel of volume 1 dm3.


 
Figure 8.5 shows that the same equilibrium can be achieved when 10.00 x mol of hydrogen iodide
molecules decompose to iodine and hydrogen. You can see that the same equilibrium concentrations of all


three molecules are achieved.
    
    
  
   
 


 


 

£
= 10.0 equilibrium reached
x 103
© line shows decrease in
~ 7.04 concentration of hydrogen
iodide as the equilibrium
is established
5.0
4.0 line shows increase in
3.0 concentration of both
20 and iodine as the
5 1.0 is established
0.68 x
0.0


§ ° Time
Figure 8.5: The changes in the concentrations of reagents as 10.00 x mol of hydrogen iodide react to form an


equilibrium mixture with hydrogen and iodine gases in a vessel of 1


 


Question
questions relate to the information in Figure 8.5.
are the concentrations of iodine and hydrogen at equilibrium the same?


how the depth of colour of the reaction mixture changes as time progresses.
why there must be 8.64 x mol of hydrogen iodide molecules in the equilibrium
mixture if 0.68 x mol of iodine are present.


Equilibrium requires a closed system
A closed system is one in which none of the reactants or products escapes from the reaction mixture. In an
open system some matter is lost to the surroundings. Figure 8.6 shows the difference between a closed


system and an open system when calcium carbonate is heated at a high temperature in a strong container.
Many chemical reactions can be studied without placing them in closed containers. They can reach


equilibrium in open flasks if the reaction takes place entirely in solution and no gas is lost.
CaCO3(s) CaO(s) + CO2(g)


© CaCO3(s) © CaO(s)


 


 


CaO(s) + CO2(g)
Figure 8.6: a A closed system. No carbon dioxide escapes. The calcium carbonate is in equilibrium with calcium oxide and
carbon dioxide. b An open system. The calcium carbonate is continually decomposing as the carbon dioxide is lost. The


reaction eventually goes to completion.


 


Question
2 contains saturated aqueous sodium chloride solution in contact with undissolved solid
sodium chloride. Sodium ions and chloride ions are constantly moving from solid to solution and from


solution to solid.


a i Explain why this is a closed system.
ii why the concentration of the saturated sodium chloride solution does not change,

even though ions are still moving into the solution from the solid.
is a reddish-brown liquid that vaporises at room temperature. Some liquid bromine is put
in a closed jar. The colour of the bromine vapour above the liquid gets darker and darker until the
depth of colour remains constant. Bromine liquid still remains in the jar. Explain what is
happening in terms of changes in concentration of the bromine molecules in the vapour.


8.2 Changing the position of equilibrium


IMPORTANT
Remember that although the concentration of reactants and products are constant at equilibrium,


this does not mean that they are equal to each other.


The position of equilibrium tells us how far the reaction goes to the products or reactants.
If the concentration of products is greater than the concentration of reactants, the position of


equilibrium is to the right (towards the product side).
If the concentration of products is far less than the concentration of reactants, the position of


equilibrium is to the left (towards the reactants side).
Remember that for equilibrium reactions, you always have to refer to the equation written. If you


write it the other way round, the reactants are the products!


 


Position of equilibrium
The position of equilibrium refers to the relative amounts of products and reactants present in an


equilibrium mixture.
If a system in equilibrium is disturbed (e.g. by a change in temperature) and the concentration of products


increases relative to the reactants, we say that the position of equilibrium has shifted to the right.
If the concentration of products decreases relative to the reactants, we say that the position of equilibrium


has shifted to the left.


Le Chatelier’s principle
Changes in both concentration and temperature affect the position of equilibrium. When any of the
reactants or products are gases, changes in pressure may also affect the position of equilibrium. French
chemist Henri Le Chatelier (1850-1936) observed how these factors affect the position of equilibrium. He


put forward a general rule, known as Le Chatelier’s principle.
If one or more factors that affect a dynamic equilibrium is changed, the position of equilibrium moves to


minimise this change.
We can predict the effect of changing concentration and pressure by referring to the stoichiometric
equation for the reaction. We can predict the effect of changing the temperature by referring to the


enthalpy change of the reaction.
How does change in concentration affect the position of
equilibrium?


When the concentration of one or more of the reactants is increased:


the system is no longer in equilibrium
the position of equilibrium moves to the right to reduce the effect of the increase in concentration of


reactant
more products are formed until equilibrium is restored.


When the concentration of one or more of the products is increased:


the system is no longer in equilibrium
e the position of equilibrium moves to the left to reduce the effect of the increase in concentration of


product

more reactants are formed until equilibrium is restored.

For example, look at the reaction:
+ = +
ethanoic acid ethanol ethyl ethanoate water


What happens when we add more ethanol?


The concentration of ethanol is increased.
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, some of the ethanol must be removed to reduce the concentration of


the added ethanol.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the right.


More ethanol reacts with ethanoic acid and more ethyl ethanoate and water are formed.
What happens when we add more water?


The concentration of water is increased.
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, some of the water must be removed to reduce the concentration of


the added water.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the left.

So more water reacts with ethyl ethanoate and more ethanoic acid and ethanol are formed.

What happens when we remove some water?

The concentration of water is decreased.
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, some water must be added to increase its concentration.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the right.


So more ethanoic acid reacts with ethanol and more water and ethyl ethanoate are formed.
A natural effect of how change in concentration affects the position of equilibrium is shown by the


formation of stalactites and stalagmites (Figure 8.7).

 
Figure 8.7: Stalactites and stalagmites are formed as a result of water passing through rocks containing calcium
carbonate. The solution running through these rocks contains water, dissolved carbon dioxide and calcium



hydrogencarbonate:


CaCO3(s) + + CO2(aq) = Ca(HCO3)2(aq)
When droplets of this mixture are formed on the roof of the cave, some of the carbon dioxide in the droplets escapes into


the air. The position of equilibrium shifts to the left and calcium carbonate is deposited.


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 8.1


An equilibrium involving iodine, acid and alkali
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
lodine dissolves in aqueous potassium iodide. We shall call this ‘iodine solution’. lodine is also soluble
in aqueous sodium hydroxide. In this activity, you will see how you can reverse the reaction by


changing the concentration of acid or alkali.


You will need two test-tubes and three dropping pipettes for this experiment.
Procedure


Using a dropping pipette, put 1 cm depth of ‘iodine solution’ into two separate test-tubes.
To the first test-tube add dilute sulfuric acid (use a fresh dropping pipette). Record any


observations
To the second test-tube add dilute sodium hydroxide (use a fresh dropping pipette). Record any


observations.
To the first test-tube add sodium hydroxide until it is in excess. Record any observations.
To the second test-tube add sulfuric acid until it is in excess. Record any observations.


How do you know that the reaction is reversible?


Explain the results in terms of H* ions from the acid and ions from the alkali.

 

Question
Use this reaction:
CH3COOH(I) + = +
Explain what happens to the position of equilibrium when:
i more is added

ii is removed.


this reaction:
+ Fe2+(aq) +
Explain what happens to the position of equilibrium when:


i the concentration of ions is increased


ii is added to the equilibrium mixture.


The effect of pressure on the position of equilibrium
Change in pressure only affects reactions where gases are reactants or products. The molecules or ions in
solids and liquids are packed closely together and cannot be compressed very easily. In gases, the


molecules are far apart (Figure 8.8).


    


/ higher pressure
means higher


concentration


gas


 
lower pressure means


lower concentration


 


Figure 8.8: Pressure has a considerable effect on the concentration of gases.


 
The pressure of a gas is caused by the molecules hitting the walls of the container. Each molecule in a
mixture of gases contributes towards the total pressure. So, at constant temperature, the more gas


molecules there are in a given volume, the higher the pressure.
Figure 8.9 shows what happens when we increase the pressure on the reaction represented by:
X(g) + =
1 mol 1 mol
In this reaction there are two moles of gas on the left and one on the right. When the pressure is increased
at constant temperature:
the molecules are closer together, because the pressure has increased
the position of equilibrium shifts to minimise this increase
e it shifts in the direction of fewer gas molecules (in the direction that opposes the increase in pressure)


more product, Z, is formed from X and Y until equilibrium is re-established.


a Initial pressure


   
13 molecules
contributing to
the pressure.




More molecules
of Z are formed,
reducing the total
number of molecules


from 13 to 11.
Figure 8.9: An increase in pressure in this case causes the equilibrium to shift to the right, to produce more molecules of


Z than before, but fewer molecules in the reaction vessel overall.


 
For example, consider the reaction:


+ 02(g) =


There are three moles of gas molecules on the left of the equation and two on the right.

What happens when we increase the pressure?
The molecules are closer together, because the pressure is higher.



According to Le Chatelier’s principle, the reaction must shift in the direction that reduces the number of


molecules of gas.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the right.


So more reacts with to form SO3.
What happens when we decrease the pressure?


The molecules are further apart, because the pressure is lower.
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, the reaction must shift in the direction that increases the number of

molecules of gas.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the left.
So more and molecules are formed by the decomposition of SO3 molecules.
Table 8.2 summarises the effect of changes in pressure on two other gas reactions.


Note that:
if there are equal numbers of molecules of gas on each side of the equation, the position of equilibrium


is not affected by a change in pressure.
involving gases and solids (or liquids), it is only the molecules of gases that count when

determining how pressure affects the position of equilibrium.
pressure equilibrium position shifts towards product: more equilibrium position shifts towards reactant:


increase NH3 forms more forms
pressure equilibrium position shifts towards reactants: more | equilibrium position shifts towards product:


decrease N2 and H2 form more NO2 forms


Table 8.2: The effect of changes in pressure on gas reactions.


 

 


Question
4 Predict the effect of increasing the pressure on the following reactions:
i =


ii CaCO3(s) = CaO(s) + CO2(g)


the effect of decreasing the pressure on the reaction:


2NO(g) +


The effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium


The decomposition of hydrogen iodide is an endothermic reaction.


2HI(g) + AH, = +9.6
The effect of temperature on the equilibrium concentration of hydrogen iodide and hydrogen at equilibrium


for the forward reaction is shown in Table 8.3.


 


490 0.773 0.114


Table 8.3: Effect of temperature on the decomposition of hydrogen iodide.


 
You can see from Table 8.3 that, as the temperature increases, the concentration of product increases. The
position of equilibrium shifts to the right. We can explain this using Le Chatelier’s principle:


in temperature increases the energy of the surroundings
according to Le Chatelier’s principle, the reaction will go in the direction that opposes the increase in

energy
e the reaction will go in the direction in which energy is absorbed, which is the endothermic reaction

the position of equilibrium shifts to the right, producing more and
If an increase of temperature favours an endothermic reaction, a decrease of temperature favours an


exothermic reaction. This means that:


* in temperature decreases the energy of the surroundings
according to Le Chatelier’s principle, the reaction will go in the direction that opposes the decrease in


energy


so the reaction will go in the direction in which energy is released, which is the exothermic reaction.
Table 8.4 summarises the effect of temperature changes on the position of equilibrium for endothermic and


exothermic reactions.
temperature position of equilibrium shifts towards products: position of equilibrium shifts towards reactants:


increase more and formed more and O2 formed


 
temperature position of equilibrium shifts towards reactant: position of equilibrium shifts towards product:


decrease more HI formed more SO3 formed


Table 8.4: Effect of temperature on endothermic and exothermic reactions.


 
Question
5 Predict the effect of increasing the temperature on the reaction:
+ CO2(g) = H20(g) + CO(g)
AH, = +41.2 kj
Inthe reaction


Ag2CO3(s) = Ag20(s) + CO2(g)
increasing the temperature increases the amount of carbon dioxide formed at constant pressure.


Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic? Explain your answer.


Do catalysts have any effect on the position of equilibrium?
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction. Catalysts reduce the time taken to
reach equilibrium, but they have no effect on the position of equilibrium once this is reached. This is


because they increase the rate of the forward and reverse reactions equally.


IMPORTANT


 

Remember that:
The equilibrium constant, K, or K,, remains the same value even when we change the concentration
or pressure or add a catalyst.


| ¢ Only change in temperature affects the value of the equilibrium constant or Kp. |
8.3 Equilibrium expressions and the equilibrium


constant,


IMPORTANT
Remember square brackets, e.g. are used here to show the concentration of the substance
inside the brackets. Don’t get them muddled with the square brackets used for complex ions (see


Chapter 24).


When writing equilibrium expressions we assume that [X][Y] means [X] x [Y]
we are being very accurate, we should include the subscript eqm after the square brackets e.g.


but this is usually omitted.


 
Equilibrium expressions
When hydrogen reacts with iodine in a closed tube at 500 K, the following equilibrium is set up:


+ =
Table 8.5 shows the relationship between the equilibrium concentrations of and HI. The square


brackets in the last column refer to the concentration, in mol of the substance inside the brackets.
The results are obtained as follows:
several tubes are set up with different starting concentrations of hydrogen and iodine
the contents of the tubes are allowed to reach equilibrium at 500 K
the concentrations of hydrogen, iodine and hydrogen iodide at equilibrium are determined.
The last column in Table 8.5 shows the number we get by arranging the concentrations of lz and Hlina
particular way. We get this expression by taking the square of the concentration of hydrogen iodide and
dividing it by the concentrations of hydrogen and iodine at equilibrium. So for the first line of data in Table
8.5:
(8.64 x


x x


= 161


 
You can see that this expression gives an approximately constant value close to about 160 whatever the


starting concentrations of lz and HI.
We call this constant the equilibrium constant, The subscript ‘c’ refers to the fact that concentrations


have been used in the calculations.
There is a simple relationship that links to the equilibrium concentrations of reactants and products and


the stoichiometry of the equation. This is called an equilibrium expression.


IMPORTANT
Remember that the concentrations of products go at the top of an equilibrium expression and the


concentrations of the reactants go at the bottom.
Solids and liquids that appear in the balanced equation are NOT included in the equilibrium


expression.


 
For a general reaction:

mA
(where p and q are the number of moles in the stoichiometric equation)


concentration of product D


[C]? number of moles of product D


[A] [B]"<— number of moles of reactant B


concentration of reactant B
In equilibrium expressions involving a solid, we ignore the solid. This is because its concentration remains


constant, however much solid is present. For example:
Ag*(aq) + Fe?*(aq) = Ag(s) +
The equilibrium expression for this reaction is:



0.68 x 10-3 0.68 x 10-3 8.64 x 10-3 161
0.50 x 1073 0.50 x 1073 6.30 x 1073 159
1.10 x 1073 2.00 x 10-3 18.8 x 1073 161


2.50 x 0.65 x 16.1 x 10-3 160


Table 8.5: The relationship between the equilibrium concentrations of H2, and HI in the reaction H2 + Iz = 2HI


 


 


What are the units of K,?
In the equilibrium expression, each figure within a square bracket represents the concentration in mol dm


The units of therefore depend on the form of the equilibrium expression.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
Write an expression for


+ 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)


Solution



Write an expression for


+ =


 


 


 
Solution


the units of K, for the reaction:
+ = 2HI
Solution



x
Units of


x


The units of mol cancel, so K, has no units.
the units of K, for the reaction:

+ O2(g) =

Solution


Units of
x


x x (mol


 
= = dm3


 
Question
equilibrium expressions for the following reactions and state the units of


+ = CH30H(g)


+ & +


Some examples of equilibrium calculations


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
4 calculation we are given the number of moles of each of the reactants and products at


equilibrium together with the volume of the reaction mixture.
Ethanol reacts with ethanoic acid to form ethyl ethanoate and water.
+ = +


ethanoic acid ethanol ethyl ethanoate water
500 of the reaction mixture at equilibrium contained 0.235 mol of ethanoic acid and 0.0350 mol
of ethanol together with 0.182 mol of ethyl ethanoate and 0.182 mol of water. Use this data to


calculate a value of K, for this reaction.
Solution
Step 1: Write out the balanced chemical equation with the concentrations beneath each
substance.
+ = +
0.235 x 1000 0.182 x 1000 0.182 x 1000
500 500 500 500
0.470 mol 0.070 mol 0.364 mol 0.364 mol
Step 2: Write the equilibrium constant for this reaction in terms of concentration.

H; OH]
Step 3: Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the expression.
0.364) x (0.364

= 4.03 (to 3 significant figures)
(0.470) x (0.070)


5
Step 4: Add the correct units by referring back to the equilibrium expression:
The units of mol cancel, so has no units.


Therefore = 4.03.
Note: If there are equal numbers of moles on the top and bottom of the
equilibrium expression, you can use moles rather than concentration in mol
in the calculation. In all other cases, if volumes are given, the concentrations must


be calculated before they are substituted into the equilibrium expression.
In this example we are only given the initial concentrations of the reactants and the equilibrium


concentration of the product.
Propanone reacts with hydrogen cyanide as follows:
+ HCN = CH;C(OH)(CN)CH,


propanone hydrogen cyanide product
A mixture of 0.0500 mol propanone and 0.0500 mol hydrogen cyanide is left to reach
equilibrium at room temperature. At equilibrium the concentration of the product is 0.0233 mol dm


Calculate K, for this reaction.


Solution


Step 1: Write out the balanced chemical equation with all the data underneath:
+ HCN
initial conc.: 0.0500 mol 0500 mol 0 mol


Conc. at equilibrium: be calculated to be calculated 0.0233 mol


Step 2: Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of the reactants.
The chemical equation shows that for every mole of product formed, 1 mole of
CH3COCH3 and 1 mole of HCN are consumed. So the equilibrium concentrations


are as follows:
CH3COCH3; 0.0500 — 0.0233 = 0.0267 mol


HCN; 0.0500 — 0.0233 = 0.0267 mol
Step 3: Write the equilibrium constant for this reaction in terms of concentrations:




Step 4: Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the expression


(0.0233)
= = (to 3 significant figures


(0.0267)


Step 5: Add the correct units by referring back to the equilibrium expression.
3 -1


= mol


dm~*) (mol


So K, = 32.7 dm3
In this example we are given the initial and equilibrium concentrations of the reactants but not the


products.
Ethyl ethanoate is hydrolysed by water:
CH;COOC,H; + = CH;COOH + C,H;0H


ethanoate water ethanoic acid ethanol
0.1000 mol of ethyl ethanoate are added to 0.1000 mol of water. A little acid catalyst is added and
the mixture made up to 1 with an inert solvent. At equilibrium 0.0654 mol of water are present.


Calculate K, for this reaction.


Solution


Step 1: Write out the balanced chemical equation with all the data underneath.
+ = CH;COOH +
initial conc.: 0.1000 mol 0.1000 mol 0 0


cone. at equilibrium: 0.0654 mol


Step 2: Calculate the unknown concentrations:
the chemical equation shows that 1 mole of reacts with 1 mole water, so the
equilibrium concentration of is also 0.0654 mol (as we started with the same


initial concentrations of ethyl ethanoate and water)


e the amount of water used in forming the products is (0.1000 — 0.0654) = 0.0346 mol
The chemical equation shows that 1 mole of water formed 1 mole of ethanoic acid and 1 mole of

ethanol. So the concentrations of both the products at equilibrium is 0.0346 mol
CH;COOC,H; + = CH;COOH + C,H;0H
conc. at equilibrium / mol 0.0654 0.0654 0.0346 0.0346
Step 3: Write the equilibrium constant for this reaction in terms of concentrations:
_



Step 4: Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the expression:


(0.0346) x (0.0346)
(0.0645) x (0.0645)


(to 3 significant figures)



Step 5: Add the correct units by referring back to the equilibrium expression.
x


x


 


 


 


 


The units of mol cancel, so K, has no units. Therefore = 0.288.


 


Questions

7

Calculate the value of K, for the following reaction using the information below:

+ CO2(g) = + CO(g)

initial concentration of = 10.00 mol

initial concentration of = 10.00 mol
equilibrium concentration of CO(g) = 9.47 mol


Nitrogen and hydrogen react together to form ammonia.
+ 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)
0.1 mol of nitrogen and 0.1 mol of hydrogen were mixed in a closed container of volume 1
At equilibrium n mol ammonia is formed. What is the concentration of hydrogen at equilibrium?
A
B 0.1


D
0.1



IMPORTANT
The key stages in equilibrium calculations are:
Write the equation.


Write down the information about the concentrations given below each reactant / product.


Deduce the concentrations at equilibrium.
2
3
4 Write the equilibrium expression.


5


Substitute the values to find either or the concentration of a particular reactant / product.


REFLECTION
Work with another learner to draw a spider diagram (mind map) of what you have learned so far about
equilibrium. For example, one arm of your diagram could be equilibrium (in the centre of the diagram)


effect of different factors > X, Y, Z.
Another arm could be equilibrium (in the centre of the diagram) equilibrium expressions > how you


write them / what not to include.


How would you improve your spider diagram?


 


and concentration changes
If all other conditions remain constant, the value of does not change when the concentration of


reactants or products is altered.
Take the example of the decomposition of hydrogen iodide.
2HI + Ip


The equilibrium constant at 500 K for this reaction is 6.25 x 1073.



When more hydrogen iodide is added to the equilibrium mixture, the equilibrium is disturbed.


 


= 6.25 x 1073
The ratio of concentrations of products to reactants in the equilibrium expression decreases.


To restore equilibrium, both and increase and [HI] decreases.
Equilibrium is restored when the values of the concentrations in the equilibrium expression are such that


the value of K, is once again 6.25 x 107-3.


and pressure changes
Where there are different numbers of gas molecules on each side of a chemical equation, a change in
pressure alters the position of equilibrium. It is shifted in the direction that results in fewer gas molecules
being formed. However, if all other conditions remain constant, the value of does not change when the


pressure is altered.


and temperature changes
We have seen in Section 8.2 that for an endothermic reaction, an increase in temperature shifts the


reaction in the direction of more products.


So for the endothermic reaction:


=H +


the concentrations of Hz and increase as the temperature increases


the concentration of HI falls as the temperature increases.


Look at how these changes affect the equilibrium expression:



 
We see that the equilibrium constant must increase with increasing temperature. This is because and
are increasing and [HI] is decreasing. Table 8.6 shows how the value of for this reaction changes with


temperature.


Table 8.6: Variation of for the reaction 2HI = + Iz with temperature.


 

 
For an exothermic reaction, an increase in temperature shifts the reaction in favour of more reactants.

Now look at the exothermic reaction:
+ O2 = 2S03
The concentrations of SO and increase as the temperature increases.
The concentration of falls as the temperature increases.

How do these changes affect the equilibrium expression?

2



2



We see that the equilibrium constant must decrease with increasing temperature. This is because
and are increasing and [SO3] is decreasing.
Question
9 Deduce the effect of increase in temperature on the value of K, for the reaction:

+ AH, = —115 kj
Explain why increasing the concentration of oxygen in this reaction does not affect the value of




8.4 Equilibria in gas reactions: the equilibrium


constant, K,


Partial pressure
For reactions involving mixtures of gases, it is easier to measure the pressure than to measure
concentrations. The total pressure in a mixture of gases is due to each molecule bombarding the walls of
the container. At constant temperature, each gas in the mixture contributes to the total pressure in
proportion to the number of moles present (Figure 8.10). The pressure exerted by any one gas in the


mixture is called its partial pressure.


 


 


 


 


 


 
° ° ° °

°

° ° °
partial total
OgasB pressure pressure


=8 Pa =3Pa =11Pa


the volumes of the containers are the same


Figure 8.10: Each gas in this mixture contributes to the pressure in proportion to the number of moles present.


 


The total pressure of a gas equals the sum of the partial pressures of the individual gases.


= Pa + + Pc...


where Pa, Pp, Pc are the partial pressures of the individual gases in the mixture.


Equilibrium expressions involving partial pressures
We write equilibrium expressions in terms of partial pressures in a similar way to equilibrium expressions in


terms of concentrations. But there are some differences:


weuse for partial pressure


e the reactants and products are written as subscripts after the p


the number of moles of particular reactants or products is written as a power after the p


square brackets are not used
we give the equilibrium constant the symbol K, (the equilibrium constant in terms of partial pressures).
For example, the equilibrium expression for the reaction:


+ 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)
2



is written as K, =
3


PN, * PH,


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
the units of K, for the following reaction:
=


Solution


The equilibrium expression is:
2
P;


Pax Pa


The units are ————— = Pa
8 Deduce the units of K, for the following reaction:


+ O2(g)


Solution


The equilibrium expression is:
2

=
*
Pa x Pa 1
The units are = — =


Pa Pa Pa


 


What are the units of K,?


The units of pressure are pascals, Pa. The units of K, depend on the form of the equilibrium expression.
Although the standard unit of pressure is the pascal, many chemists in industry use the atmosphere as the
unit of pressure. 1 atmosphere = 1.01 x 10° Pa. Using ‘atmospheres’ as units simplifies calculations


because the numbers used are not as large.


Questions


10 The reaction below was carried out at a pressure of 10.00 x 104 Pa and at constant temperature.


+ 2NO(g)

The partial pressures of nitrogen and oxygen are both 4.85 x 104 Pa.
Calculate the partial pressure of the nitrogen(II) oxide, NO(g), at equilibrium.

the units of K, for the following reactions:


= +


+ = 2NH3(g)


+ = +


Calculations using partial pressures


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
9 example we are given the partial pressure of each gas in the mixture.
In the reaction:


+ =2S03(g)
the equilibrium partial pressures at constant temperature are SO> = 1.0 x 10° Pa, = 7.0 x Pa,


SO3 = 8.0 x Pa. Calculate the value of Kp for this reaction.


Solution
Step 1: Write the equilibrium expression for the reaction in terms of partial pressures.
2



2

*
p




Step 2: Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the expression.

8.0 x
) = 9.1 x
(1.0 x x 7.0 x 10°
Step 3: Add the correct units.


1



Pa Pa


x 1076


The units are
10 In this calculation we are given the partial pressure of two of the three gases in the mixture as well


as the total pressure.
Nitrogen reacts with hydrogen to form ammonia.


+ 3H2(g) = 2NH3(g)
The pressure exerted by this mixture of hydrogen, nitrogen and ammonia at constant temperature is
2.000 x Pa. Under these conditions, the partial pressure of nitrogen is 1.490 x 107 Pa and the


partial pressure of hydrogen is 0.400 x Pa. Calculate the value of Kp for this reaction.


 
Solution
Step 1: Calculate the partial pressure of ammonia. We know that the total pressure is the
sum of the partial pressures.
Ptotal = PN, + PH, +
2.00 x 107 =
(1.49 x 107) + (0.400 x 107) +
Partial pressure of = 0.110 x 107 Pa
Step 2: Write the equilibrium expression for the reaction in terms of partial pressures.


PN, PH,
Step 3: Substitute the equilibrium concentrations into the expression.
(0.110 x 107)”
x 107) x (0.400 x


K, x


Step 4: Add the correct units.



The units =


 


 
Pa


K, = 1.27


 
Questions
The information below gives the data for the reaction of hydrogen with iodine at 500 °C.


+ = 2HI(g)
The table shows the initial partial pressures and the partial pressures at equilibrium of hydrogen,


iodine and hydrogen iodide. The total pressure was constant throughout the experiment.


 


Initially 7.27 x 4.22 x 106 0


At equilibrium 3.41 x 7.72 x


 


Table 8.7: Table for Question 12.


 
Deduce the partial pressure of the iodine at equilibrium.


b the value of K, for this reaction, including the units.
metallic mercury is shaken with a solution of nitrate a solution of nitrate


is formed.


+ = (aq)


What is the correct equilibrium expression for this reaction?


 


 
a



c




Partial pressure and mole fractions
The number of moles of gas is proportional to the volume of the gas at constant temperature. So it follows
that the partial pressure of a gas is proportional to its concentration. The mole fraction of a gas is given


by the relationship:


number of moles of a particular gas


 


mole fraction


 


total number of moles of all the gases in a mixture
So the mole fraction of ammonia in a mixture containing 0.5 mol ammonia, 0.9 mol hydrogen and 0.6 mol


of nitrogen is:
0.5
0.5 + 0.9 + 0.6


The partial pressure is related to the mole fraction by the relationship:


= 0.25 (no units)


partial pressure = mole fraction x total pressure (of all the gases in the mixture)
We can therefore use the number of moles of each reactant and product in a mixture together with the


total pressure to calculate a value for Kp.


IMPORTANT
Note that the sum of the mole fractions should add up to 1.00 and that the sum of the partial
pressures should add up to the total pressure. In Worked example 10 we are using experimental


figures to 3 significant figures but if we kept all the figures to the most accurate possible in our


calculators when doing the working the values should add up correctly.


WORKED EXAMPLE

 
11 The equilibrium between hydrogen, iodine and hydrogen iodide at 600 K is shown.
H2(g) + =
At equilibrium the number of moles present are:
& = 10-2


The total pressure is 100 kPa.


Calculate the value of K, for this reaction.
Solution
Step 1: Calculate the total number of moles
(1.71 x 1073) + (2.91 x 1073) + (1.65 x 107?)
=
Step 2: Calculate the mole fraction of each gas


«
2.91 x

« 10


2.112 « 10
Step 3: Calculate the partial pressure of each gas
= 0.0810 x 100 = 8.10 kPa
= 0.1378 X 100 = 13.78 kPa
HI = 0.7813 x 100 = 78.13 kPa
Step 4: Write the equilibrium expression and substitute the values
2
Pu
PH, X

= _ (no units)


8.10 x 13.78


 


8.5 Equilibria and the chemical industry
An understanding of equilibrium is important in the chemical industry. Equilibrium reactions are involved in


some of the stages in the large-scale production of ammonia, sulfuric acid and many other chemicals.
Equilibrium and ammonia production
The synthesis of ammonia is carried out by the Haber process. The equilibrium reaction involved is:


+ 2NH3(g) AH, = —92
We can use Le Chatelier’s principle to show how to get the best yield of ammonia. At high temperatures,
when the reaction is faster, the position of equilibrium is to the left because the reaction is exothermic (AH


is negative).


What happens if we increase the pressure?
When we increase the pressure, the reaction goes in the direction that results in fewer molecules of gas


being formed.


The equilibrium shifts in the direction that reduces the pressure.
In this case there are four molecules of gas on the left-hand side and two on the right-hand side. So the


equilibrium shifts towards the right.


The yield of ammonia increases.
What happens if we decrease the temperature?
A decrease in temperature decreases the energy of the surroundings.


The reaction will go in the direction in which energy is released.
Energy is released in the exothermic reaction, in which the position of equilibrium favours ammonia


production.


This shifts the position of equilibrium to the right.


The value of K, increases.
What happens if we remove ammonia by condensing it to a liquid?
We can do this because ammonia has a much higher boiling point than hydrogen and nitrogen.


The position of equilibrium shifts to the right to replace the ammonia that has been removed.


More ammonia is formed from hydrogen and nitrogen to keep the value of K, constant.


Equilibrium and the production of sulfuric acid
The synthesis of sulfuric acid is carried out by the Contact process. The main equilibrium reaction involved


is:


+ O2(g) = = —197


We can use Le Chatelier’s principle to show how to get the best yield of sulfur trioxide.


What happens when we increase the pressure?
When we increase the pressure, the reaction goes in the direction that results in fewer molecules of gas

being formed, to reduce the pressure.
There are three molecules of gas on the left-hand side and two on the right-hand side, so the equilibrium
shifts towards the right.



However, in practice, the reaction is carried out at just above atmospheric pressure. This is because the

value of K, is very high.
The position of equilibrium is far over to the right even at atmospheric pressure. Very high pressure is

unnecessary, and is not used as it is expensive.


What happens if we decrease the temperature?


Decreasing the temperature shifts the position of equilibrium to the right.
A decrease in temperature decreases the energy of the surroundings so the reaction will go in the direction


in which energy is released.
This is the exothermic reaction, in which the position of equilibrium favours SO3 production. The value of


increases.
SO3 is removed by absorbing it in 98% sulfuric acid. The SO3 reacts with the solution and eventually more
H2SO, is formed. Although the SO3 is absorbed in a continuous process, this does not affect the equilibrium


significantly because the position of equilibrium is already far over to the right.


Question
14 The Haber process for the synthesis of may operate at a temperature of 450 °C and pressure


of 1.50 x Pa using an iron catalyst.


+ = 2NH3(g) AH, = —92
Suggest why a temperature of more than 450 °C is not used even though the rate of reaction


would be faster.
b why the reaction is carried out at a high pressure rather than at normal atmospheric


pressure. Explain your answer.
why the removal of ammonia as soon as it is formed is an important part of this industrial


process.
When the ammonia has been removed, why doesn’t it decompose back to nitrogen and


hydrogen?


8.6 Acid-base equilibria


pH values and neutralisation
pH values


We can use universal indicator or a pH meter to deduce whether a substance is acidic, alkaline or neutral.
acids have pH values below pH 7


alkalis have pH values above pH 7


aneutral solution has a pH value of exactly 7.


Neutralisation
A salt is a compound formed when an acid reacts with a base (or alkali). This type of reaction is called a


neutralisation reaction.


Examples are:


+ 2NaOH(aq) +
sulfuric acid sodium hydroxide sodium sulfate water
+

hydrochloric acid barium hydroxide barium chloride water

From these equations we can see that:

acid + alkali > salt + water


sodium sulfate and barium chloride are salts
the simplest ionic equation for a neutralisation reaction is:


+ >


Some simple definitions of acids and bases
A very simple definition of an acid is that it is a substance that neutralises a base. A salt and water are


formed.
2HCl(aq) + CaO(s) = +


acid base
The equation above also shows us a very simple definition of a base. A base is a substance that neutralises


an acid.


IMPORTANT
A base is a compound that contains oxide or hydroxide ions and reacts with an acid to form a salt and


water. Alkalis are bases which are soluble in water.

 
If we look at the formulae for some acids in Table 8.8, we see that they all contain hydrogen atoms. When
the acid dissolves in water, it ionises and forms hydrogen ions. Note that in organic acids such as
carboxylic acids (see Section 14.3), only some of the hydrogen atoms are capable of forming ions (see
Figure 8.11).


 
Figure 8.11: The sour taste of lemons is due to citric acid and that of vinegar is due to ethanoic acid. Baking soda is basic


and is used to make bread dough rise.


 


Acid-base equilibria are important in the human body (Figure 8.12).


 
Figure 8.12: Many foods have high quantities of sugar in them. The sugar is converted to acid by bacteria in your mouth.
This acid can attack the enamel on your teeth. By chewing sugar-free gum, more saliva is produced. Saliva is slightly


alkaline. It neutralises the acid.


 


Table 8.8: Formulae and ions of some common acids.


+


 


 


IMPORTANT


You must know the names and formulae of the first four acids in Table 8.8.


 
A better definition of an acid is a substance that releases hydrogen ions when it dissolves in water. For


example:


+ aq > H*(aq) +
The formulae for some bases are given in Table 8.9. Many metal oxides or hydroxides are bases. Some
bases dissolve in water to form hydroxide ions in solution. A base that is soluble in water is called an alkali.


For example:


NaOH(s) + aq > +
Some alkalis are formed by the reaction of a base with water. When ammonia gas dissolves in water, some


of the ammonia molecules react with water molecules. Hydroxide ions are released in this reaction.


NH3(g) + NH4* (aq) +
Aqueous ammonia is therefore an alkali. We can also see from the equation above that the ammonia has
accepted a hydrogen ion to become So a wider definition of a base is a substance that accepts


hydrogen ions.


IMPORTANT
Common alkalis that you must know are: sodium hydroxide (NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH) and


ammonia (NH3)


calcium oxide CaO


oxide CuO


calcium hydroxide


ammonia NH3


 


Table 8.9: The formulae of some common bases.


 
Question
15 Write an equation to show potassium hydroxide dissolving in water.
b an equation for liquid nitric acid dissolving in water.
ionic equations for:


i the reaction in aqueous solution between sodium hydroxide and nitric acid


ii the reaction in aqueous solution between potassium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid.


The Br@nsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases
The definitions of acids and bases given earlier are limited to reactions taking place in water. In 1923 the
Danish chemist J. Bransted and the English chemist T. Lowry suggested a more general definition of acids
and bases. This definition is based on the idea that in an acid-base reaction, a proton is transferred from an


acid to a base (a hydrogen ion, Ht, is a proton).
A acid is a proton donor.


A Bronsted-Lowry base is a proton acceptor.
When hydrochloric acid is formed, hydrogen chloride gas dissolves in water and reacts to form
hydroxonium ions, and chloride ions (Figure 8.13). You can see that the water is involved in the


reaction.

+ > +
Hydrochloric acid is an acid because it donates a proton to water. This means that water is acting as a
base. The water is accepting a proton:


donated


+ > +


acid base
Water can also act as an acid. When ammonia reacts with water, it accepts a proton from the water and


becomes an ion (Figure 8.14).


+ H3O*(aq) +
proton +

<2 T
—


J


...forming the leaving a
the proton, is donated


positive negative chloride ion
by the hydrogen chloride


and accepted by the water...
Figure 8.13: An acid is a proton donor. Hydrogen chloride is the acid in this reaction. A base is a proton acceptor. Water is


the base in this reaction. Remember that a proton is a hydrogen ion, Ht.


 


+ +
a




the proton, is donated the
by the water and accepted the positive negative


by the ammonia... ammonium ion... hydroxide ion


Figure 8.14: Water is the proton donor (it is the acid); ammonia is the proton acceptor (it is the base).


 


donated


NH;(g) + = + OH-(aq)


base acid


Substances like water, which can act as either acids or bases, are described as amphoteric.
acids and bases do not have to involve aqueous solutions. For example, when chloric(VII)


acid (HCIO,) reacts with ethanoic acid (CH3COOH) in an inert solvent, the following equilibrium is set up:


donated


+ CH;COOH = ClO, + CH;COOH;*


acid base
In this reaction, is the acid because it is donating a proton to CH;COOH. CH3COOH is the base


because it is a proton acceptor.
When an acid or base reacts with water, an equilibrium mixture is formed. For acids such as hydrochloric
acid, the position of equilibrium is almost entirely in favour of the products. But for ammonia, the position


of equilibrium favours the reactants. The equations can be written to show this. For example:
+ aq > H*(aq) +
A forward arrow is used as this reaction goes to completion.


NH3(g) + = +

An equilibrium arrow is used as this reaction does not go to completion.

Questions
which reactants are acids and which are bases in the following reactions:
+ = NH3 +


b + +


the acid and the base on the right-hand side of these equilibria.


a + HCOOH = ClO,~ + HCOOH,*
b + HS~ +
Strong and weak acids and bases


Strong acids


IMPORTANT


When referring to acids and bases remember that weak and strong have to do with degree of
dissociation and not concentration. Concentration is to do with the number of moles per The


words to use here are ‘concentrated’ and ‘dilute’.


 
When hydrogen chloride dissolves in water to form a solution of concentration 0.1 mol it ionises


almost completely. We say that the acid is almost completely dissociated.


HCI(g) + +
The position of equilibrium is so far over to the right that we can show this as an irreversible reaction. The
PH of this 0.1 mol solution is pH 1. The pH of a solution depends on the concentration of


hydroxonium ions, H30*. The higher the concentration of hydroxonium ions, the lower the pH.
The low pH shows that there is a high concentration of hydroxonium ions in solution.


Acids that dissociate almost completely in aqueous solution are called strong acids.


The mineral acids, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and nitric acid, are all strong acids.


IMPORTANT
Hydrogen ions in aqueous solution are correctly written as (hydroxonium or oxonium ion). It is

often acceptable to simplify its structure as H*.
For example:
lonisation of a strong acid: HCl > H* +


lonisation of a weak acid:


CH3COOH + Ht

 
Weak acids



When ethanoic acid dissolves in water to form a solution of concentration 0.1 mol it is only slightly
ionised. There are many more molecules of ethanoic acid in solution than ethanoate ions and hydroxonium


ions. We say that the acid is partially (or incompletely) dissociated.


+ =


ethanoic acid ethanoate ion hydroxonium ion
The position of equilibrium is well over to the left. The pH of this 0.1 mol solution is pH 2.9. The pH is
much higher compared with a solution of hydrochloric acid of the same concentration. This is because the


concentration of hydroxonium ions in solution is far lower.
Acids that are only partially dissociated in solution are called weak acids.


Weak acids include most organic acids, hydrocyanic acid (HCN), hydrogen sulfide and ‘carbonic acid’.
Although we sometimes talk about the weak acid carbonic acid, you will never see a bottle of it. The acid is


really an equilibrium mixture of carbon dioxide dissolved in water. The following equilibrium is set up:


+ = + Ht(aq)


The amount of that forms undissociated carbonic acid, H2CO3, is very small as ionises readily.


IMPORTANT
Sulfuric acid has two hydrogen ions that can ionise. The first hydrogen to ionise dissociates almost


completely:
H* + HSO,-.
however, behaves as a weak acid:


= H* +


 


Strong bases
When sodium hydroxide dissolves in water to form a solution of concentration 0.1 mol it ionises


completely.
NaOH(s) + aq > Na*(aq) +


The position of equilibrium is far over to the right.
The solution formed is highly alkaline due to the high concentration of hydroxide ions present. The pH of


this 0.1 mol solution is pH 13.


Bases that dissociate almost completely in solution are called strong bases.


The Group 1 metal hydroxides are strong bases.


Weak bases
When ammonia dissolves and reacts in water to form a solution of concentration 0.1 mol it is only
slightly ionised. There are many more molecules of ammonia in solution than ammonium ions and


hydroxide ions.


NH3(g) + = +
The position of equilibrium is well over to the left. The pH of this 0.1 mol solution is pH 11.1. The pH
is much lower compared with a solution of sodium hydroxide of the same concentration. This is because


the concentration of hydroxide ions in solution is far lower.


Bases which dissociate to only a small extent in solution are called weak bases.


Ammonia, amines (see Section 16.2) and some hydroxides of transition metals are weak bases.


Questions


acid is a strong acid but acid, HCIO, is a weak acid.


Explain the difference between a strong acid and a weak acid.
b equations showing the ionisation of each of these acids in water.
Suggest relative pH values for 0.1 mol aqueous solutions of:
i acid
acid
is a weak base.
i Write a chemical equation to show the equilibrium reaction of hydrazine with water.


ii State the relative concentrations (high or low) of the molecules and the products.
19 a_ The pH of a solution depends on the hydrogen ion (hydroxonium ion) concentration. Which
concentration of ethanoic acid in Table 8.10 has the highest concentration of hydrogen ions in


solution?


b acid or alkali in Table 8.10 has the highest concentration of hydroxide ions?
why a solution of 0.1 mol ethanoic acid has a lower electrical conductivity than a


solution of 0.1 mol hydrochloric acid.
Both hydrochloric acid and ethanoic acid react with magnesium. The rate of reaction of 1.0 mol
hydrochloric acid with magnesium is much faster than the rate of reaction of 1.0 mol


ethanoic acid. Explain why.


Distinguishing a weak acid from a strong acid
We can distinguish between a strong and weak acid by their pH values, electrical conductivity and
reactivity. When making these comparisons, we must use dilute solutions of strong and weak acids of the


same concentration.


pH values
Dilute solutions of a strong acids have lower pH values than those of weak acids of the same concentration.


This is because the concentration of hydrogen ions is greater in strong acids.
hydrochloric acid (strong


acid)
sodium hydroxide (strong 14 13 12


base)


Table 8.10: pH values of some typical strong and weak acids and bases.


 


 

We can determine pH by;
Dipping a pH electrode into a solution of the acid: a pH meter connected to the pH electrode shows the


PH value.
Dipping universal indicator paper into a solution of the acid and noting the colour change. We then


compare the colour with that on a chart which shows the colours at different pH values.


Table 8.10 compares the pH values of some typical strong and weak acids and bases.

Electrical conductivity
Dilute solutions of a strong acids have greater electrical conductivity than those of weak acids of the same
concentration. This is because the concentration of hydrogen ions (and other ions) is greater in strong
acids.



We can determine electrical conductivity by dipping a conductivity electrode into a solution of the acid: a


conductivity meter connected to the electrode shows the conductivity.


Reaction with reactive metals
Dilute solutions of weak and strong acids of the same concentration have different reactivity with reactive
metals such as magnesium. When a piece of magnesium ribbon is added to a strong acid, a steady stream


of hydrogen bubbles is observed.


Mg(s) + + H2(g)
When we add a piece of magnesium ribbon to a weak acid of the same concentration, only a few bubbles


are observed. This is because the concentration of hydrogen ions is greater in strong acids.


8.7 Indicators and acid-base titrations
In Chapter 3 we learned that indicators are used to detect the end-point in acid-alkali titrations. You may
also have used indicators such as litmus to test whether a substance is acidic or alkaline. In this section,
we Shall look more closely at how specific indicators are used in titrations involving strong and weak acids


and bases.


 

OH
20H-


\ \

|



colourless pink
Figure 8.15: The colour change in phenolphthalein is due to small differences in the structure of its molecule when


hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions are added.


 


Introducing indicators
An acid-base indicator is a dye or mixture of dyes that changes colour over a specific pH range (Figures
8.15 and 8.16). In simple terms, many indicators can be considered as weak acids in which the acid (HIn)

and its conjugate base (In~) have different colours.



part of part of part of
pelargonidin cation pelargonidin molecule pelargonidin anion
(red) (violet) (blue)
OH OH
OH |




+H,0
Figure 8.16: The red petals of pelargonium (geranium) contain the dye pelargonidin. Hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions can


make small changes in its molecular structure to produce different colours.


 


IMPORTANT
An acid and base on different sides of the equation are said to be conjugate with each other if one can


be converted to the other by gain or loss of a hydrogen ion (see Chapter 21).


 


HIn = Ht +


un-ionised indicator colour A conjugate base colour B
e Adding an acid to this indicator solution shifts the position of equilibrium to the left. There are now


more molecules of colour A.


Adding an alkali shifts the position of equilibrium to the right. There are now more ions of colour B.
The colour of the indicator depends on the relative concentrations of HIn and In~. The colour of the


indicator during a titration depends on the concentration of H* ions present.
Indicators usually change colour over a pH range of between 1 and 2 pH units. In the middle of the range
there is a recognisable end-point where the indicator has a colour in between the two extremes of colour.
For example, bromothymol blue is yellow in acidic solution and blue in alkaline solution. The colour change
takes place between pH 6.0 and pH 7.6. The end-point, which is a greyish-green colour, occurs when the


PH is 7.0.
The pH at which indicators begin to change colour varies considerably. Table 8.11 shows the colours,


ranges and end-points of some indicators.


red


alizarin yellow


 


Table 8.11: Some of the chemical indicators used to monitor pH, with their pH ranges of use and pH of end-point.


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 8.2


 


Monitoring pH change


In Section 3.7 we described the titration procedure for determining the amount of acid required to
neutralise an alkali. Figure 8.17 shows the apparatus used to follow the changes in pH when a base is


titrated with an acid.

Procedure

e set up the apparatus with the pH electrode connected to the computer via a data logger

e switch on the magnetic stirrer

e deliver the acid at a constant slow rate from the burette into the alkali in the flask


e stop when the pH has reached a nearly constant low value.


The pH of the reaction mixture can also be monitored manually. You record the pH after fixed volumes
of acid samples have been added to the flask, e.g. add one 1 cm? sample at a time until the pH starts


changing rapidly, then add 0.5 cm? samples.
The graphs recorded on the computer or drawn by hand show how pH varies with the volume of acid
added. The shapes of these graphs are characteristic and depend on whether the acid and base used


in the titration are strong or weak.
 
  


  



20 cm?


0.1 mol HCl


|
        
     
   
      
     


 



20
0.1 mol dm?


magnetic stirrer NaOH


Figure 8.17: Measuring the pH change during the titration of sodium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid.


 


 


Strong acids with strong bases
Figure 8.18 shows how the pH changes when 0.100 mol sodium hydroxide (a strong base) is titrated

with 0.100 mol hydrochloric acid (a strong acid) in the presence of bromothymol blue indicator.

210 bromothymol

blue is blue



§ 8 6

7 7. 7.0 | range for
6


blue



bromothymol

blue is yellow
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32
Volume of 0.100 mol HCI


Figure 8.18: A strong acid-strong base titration with bromothymol blue as indicator.

 

These results show:
fall in the graph line between pH 10.5 and pH 3.5; in this region tiny additions of ions result


in a rapid change in pH


amidpoint of the steep slope at pH 7
e the midpoint of the sharp fall corresponds to the point at which the ions in the acid have exactly


reacted with the ions in the alkali; this is the end-point of the titration
bromothymol blue indicator changed from blue to yellow over the range 7.6 to 6.0 where the slope is


steepest.
Because there is a sharp change in pH over the region pH 3.5 to 10.5 we can use other indicators that
change colour within this region. For example, phenolphthalein changes colour in the pH range 8.2 to 10.0


(Figure 8.19).
Because the sharp pH change occurs over such a wide pH range, there are many indicators that can be


used to determine the end-point of the reaction of a strong acid with a strong base.
  
 


  
range for


phenolphthalein
phenolphthalein


is colourless


  
pH of flask contents


ono
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32


Volume of 0.100 mol HCI


Figure 8.19: A strong acid-strong base titration with phenolphthalein as indicator.


 
Question


20 Use Table 8.11 to identify:
indicators which could be used for a strong acid-strong base titration like the one in Figure


8.18.


those indicators that could not be used.


Strong acids with weak bases
Figure 8.20 shows how the pH changes when 0.100 mol aqueous ammonia (a weak base) is titrated


with 0.100 mol nitric acid (a strong acid).



o
PH of flask contents



0 T


0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32


Volume of strong acid added to weak base/cm?


Figure 8.20: A typical strong acid-weak base titration.


 


These results show:
asharp fall in the graph line between pH 7.5 and pH 3.5


that the midpoint of the steep slope is at about pH 5.
Because there is a sharp change in pH over the region 3.5 to 7.5, we can use methyl red as an indicator for
this titration. This is because methyl red changes colour between pH 4.2 and pH 6.3, values that
correspond with the region of sharpest pH change. Phenolphthalein would not be a suitable indicator to use
because it only changes colour in alkaline regions (pH 8.2-10) that do not correspond to the sharp pH
change. The phenolphthalein would change colour only gradually as more and more acid is added, instead


of changing suddenly on the addition of a single drop at the end-point.


Weak acids with strong bases
Figure 8.21 shows how the pH changes when 0.100 mol aqueous sodium hydroxide (a strong base) is


titrated with 0.100 mol benzoic acid (a weak acid).
14


12


10


PH of flask contents
0 -


0 44 8 12 16 20 24 28 32


Volume of weak acid added to strong base/cm?


Figure 8.21: A typical weak acid-strong base titration.


 


These results show:
* asharp fall in the graph line between pH 11 and pH 7.5

that the midpoint of the steep slope is at about pH 9.
Because there is a sharp change in pH over the region pH 7.5 to 11 we can use phenolphthalein as an
indicator for this titration. This is because phenolphthalein changes colour between pH 8.2 and pH 10,
values that correspond with the region of sharpest pH change. orange would not be a suitable
indicator to use because it only changes colour in acidic regions that do not correspond to the sharp pH


change.


Weak acids with weak bases
Figure 8.22 shows how the pH changes when 0.100 mol aqueous ammonia (a weak base) is titrated


with 0.100 mol aqueous benzoic acid (a weak acid).
   


  
14
12
2

2
c
8 8
range for
6 bromothymol blue

ES
2 —end-point somewhere
between 19.5 and 20.5 cm?


0
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32


Volume of weak acid added to weak base / cm?


Figure 8.22: A typical weak acid-weak base titration.


 
These results show that there is no sharp fall in the graph line. No acid-base indicator is suitable to


determine the end-point of this reaction. In the example shown, bromothymol blue:


starts changing colour when 19.50 cm? of acid have been added


finishes changing colour when 20.50 cm? of acid have been added.
Such a gradual colour change on addition of acid is not good enough when you need to be able to read the


end-point to the nearest 0.05 cm3.
Questions
21 Suggest a suitable indicator to find the end-points of the reactions between:
mol nitric acid and 0.0500 mol aqueous ammonia
ii mol aqueous sodium hydroxide and 1.00 mol sulfuric acid


mol aqueous potassium hydroxide and 0.00500 mol butanoic acid.
b why phenolphthalein would not be a suitable indicator to use to find the end-point when


0.0100 mol hydrochloric acid is titrated against 0.0100 mol urea, a weak base.
22 The sketch graph (Figure 8.23) shows the change in pH when an acid and an alkali react with one

being added slowly to the other. Both acid and alkali have a concentration 0.1 mol

Which one of these statements is correct?


Weak alkali is being added to a weak acid.
alkali is being added to a strong acid.
Strong acid is being added to a weak alkali.


D


Strong alkali is being added to a weak acid.
14-


PH


 


Volume added / cm?


Figure 8.23: Sketch graph for Question 22.


 


REFLECTION
Think about what you have learned about acids and bases. Write a paragraph about the difference


between strong and weak acids and bases. Then sketch one graph to show how the pH changes when
a weak or strong acid is added slowly to a weak or strong base: choose your own combination! Share


these ideas with another learner.

What problems did you come across? How did you solve them?



SUMMARY
For some chemical reactions, dynamic equilibrium is reached when the rates of the forward and reverse reactions


are equal so the concentrations of reactants and products remain constant.
Le Chatelier’s principle states that, if a change is made to a system at dynamic equilibrium, the position of


equilibrium moves to minimise this change.
Changes in temperature, pressure and concentration of reactants and products affect the position of equilibrium,


but the value of equilibrium constant is only affected by a change in temperature.
For an equilibrium reaction, there is a relationship between the concentrations of the reactants and products which


is given by the equilibrium constant in terms of concentrations, and / or partial pressure, Kp.
Equilibrium constants in terms of concentrations, Kc, and partial pressure, Kp, can be deduced from appropriate


data.


The theory of acids and bases states that acids are proton donors and bases are proton acceptors
Strong acids and bases are completely dissociated in aqueous solution whereas weak acids and bases are only


slightly dissociated.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
reaction + O2(g) = reaches dynamic equilibrium in a closed vessel. The

forward reaction is exothermic. The reaction is catalysed by V20s.
what is meant by the term dynamic equilibrium.

what will happen to the position of equilibrium when:

sulfur trioxide, SO3, is removed from the vessel

ii the pressure in the vessel is lowered

more is added


temperature of the vessel is increased.


[2]


c Define Le Chatelier’s principle.
d_ Le Chatelier’s principle to explain what will happen to the position of equilibrium in
the reaction + = + CO(g) when the concentration of hydrogen is [5]
increased.


[Total: 13]
2 iodine and hydrogen iodide are in equilibrium in a sealed tube at constant


temperature.
The equation for the reaction is:
H2(g) + = = —96 kj


The partial pressures of each gas are shown in the table below.


[cas Partial pressure / Pa


 
2
the meaning of the term partial pressure.
[1]
the total pressure of the three gases in this mixture.
1
an equilibrium expression for this reaction in terms of partial pressures.
1
a value for K, for this reaction, including the units.
e Le Chatelier’s principle to explain what happens to the position of equilibrium in this
reaction when:
[5]
temperature is increased


[5]


ii some iodine is removed.
[Total: 15]


The equilibrium between three substances, A, B and C, is shown below.


A(g) + B(g) = C(g)
Initially there were 0.1 mol of A and 0.2 mol of B in the reaction mixture. A and B reacted together

to produce an equilibrium mixture containing 0.04 mol of C. The total volume of the mixture was

2.00 dm?.

the number of moles of A and B at equilibrium.


the concentrations of A, B and C at equilibrium.
Write the equilibrium expression for

[2]
ii Calculate the value of and give the units.



4 hydrogen and gaseous iodine react together to form hydrogen iodide. [Total: 8]


+ Ip = 2HI
graph shows how the amount of hydrogen iodide varies with time in a 1.00 dm?


container.


The initial amounts of hydrogen and iodine were 1.00 mol Hz and 1.00 mol


2.0-


1.5


Amount of HI / moles


 



1 2 3 4 5 6


units


 
5
Sketch a similar graph to show how the number of moles of hydrogen varies with time.
1
b the number of moles of iodine present at equilibrium.
i Write the equilibrium expression for K, for the reaction between gaseous hydrogen
and iodine.
[2]
ii Calculate the value of and give the units.
[Total: 9]
[3]
5 Describe three characteristic features of chemical equilibrium.
b When 1 mol of gas is allowed to come to equilibrium with gas under standard
conditions, only 20% of the is converted to NO>.
= AH, = +58
1
i Give the equilibrium expression for this reaction.
ii Calculate the value of for the reaction. Assume that the volume of the reaction [4]
mixture is 1
the effect on K, of an increase in:
[2]
i pressure


[2]


ii temperature.
[Total: 12]


This question is about the following reaction:
+ = +
ethanoic acid ethanol ethyl ethanoate water


9.20 g of ethanol are mixed with 12.00 g of ethanoic acid in an inert solvent. The total volume of
solution is 250 The mixture is left to equilibrate for several days. At equilibrium 70% of the

reactants are converted to products.
the concentration of each reactant at the start
b the concentration of each reactant at equilibrium. (2]
c the concentration of each product at equilibrium. (2]

d i Write the equilibrium expression for this reaction. [1]


ii Calculate the value of for the reaction.
Explain why there are no units for K, for this reaction.


what will happen to the numerical value of K, if 100 cm? of water is added to the


equilibrium mixture.
f what will happen to the yield of ethanoate if 100 cm? of water is added to [2]


the equilibrium mixture. Explain your answer.
[Total: 12]


7 Hydrogen chloride and ammonia both ionise in water:
+ equation 1


NH3 + = + 2
[1]


State the name of the ion
2


ii Identify the acid and the base on the left-hand side of each equation.
By referring to equation 1 and equation 2, explain why water is described as being [5]


amphoteric.
b dissolved in an organic solvent, hydrogen chloride reacts with hydrogen iodide as


follows:


HCI + HI +
Use the theory of acids and bases to explain which reactant is the acid, [2]


and which reactant is the base.


Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid but ethanoic acid, CH3COOH, is a weak acid.
2
i Explain the difference between a strong acid and a weak acid. (2]
[1]
ii Suggest a value of the pH for a 0.1 mol solution of ethanoic acid in water.


Write a chemical equation to show the reaction when ethanoic acid donates a [2]


proton to water.
Total: 15,


8 This question is about the reaction:


+ AH, = —92
120.0 mol of hydrogen gas are mixed with 40.0 mol of nitrogen gas then pressurised. The mixture
of gases is passed at constant pressure over an iron catalyst at 450 °C until the mixture reaches


equilibrium.

The total volume of the mixture is 1.0 20% of the reactants are converted to ammonia.
the number of moles of nitrogen and hydrogen remaining at equilibrium.
the number of moles of ammonia formed.
Write an equilibrium expression for
Calculate a value for including units.


e State what will happen to the numerical value of when the pressure is raised.


[1]


f what will happen to the numerical value of when the temperature is raised.
: [Total: 8]


9 Ethanol can be manufactured by reacting ethene, with steam.
+ =

[1]
the equilibrium expression in terms of partial pressures, for this reaction.


the units of K, for this reaction. [1]
reaction is at equilibrium at 290 °C and 7.00 x Pa pressure. Under these
conditions the partial pressure of ethene is 1.50 x Pa and the partial pressure of

steam is 4.20 x Pa.

1

i Calculate the partial pressure of ethanol.

1


Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant, K,, under these conditions.


reaction is carried out in a closed system. Explain the meaning of the term closed


system.
e Le Chatelier’s principle to explain what will happen to the position of equilibrium in [3]


this reaction when the pressure is increased.
f in the table below show the effect of temperature on the percentage of
ethene converted to ethanol at constant pressure. Use this information to deduce the


sign of the enthalpy change for this reaction. Explain your answer.
Temperature / °C % of ethene converted


260 40


[Total: 12]


 
10 Sketch the graph of pH that would be obtained when 10.0 cm? of 0.200 mol [3]


HCl is titrated against 0.200 mol aqueous ammonia.


IMPORTANT
In Question 10 a, the command word ‘sketch’ requires a bit more than just drawing the


line and labelling the axes. You must include some pH values.


 
Explain why methyl orange is a suitable indicator for this titration but phenolphthalein is [2]


not.
Sketch the graph that would be obtained if 25.0 cm? of 0.200 mol sodium [3]


hydroxide is titrated against 0.100 mol ethanoic acid solution.
why phenolphthalein is a suitable indicator for this titration but orange is [2]


not.
green and bromothymol blue are indicators. Bromocresol green has a pH
range of 3.8 to 5.4 and bromothymol blue has a pH range of 6 to 7.6. Would either of
these indicators be suitable for the titration in part a or the titration in part c? Explain [4]


your answer.


[Total: 14]


 
explain what is meant by dynamic equilibrium in terms of the
rate of forward and backward reactions being equal and


concentration of reactants and products remaining constant
define Le Chatelier’s principle as: if a change is made to a
system at dynamic equilibrium the position of equilibrium


moves to minimise this change
use Le Chatelier’s principle to deduce qualitatively the effects
of changes in temperature, concentration, pressure or

presence of a catalyst on a reaction at equilibrium
understand which factors affect the value of the equilibrium 33
constant


describe and explain the conditions used in the Haber process
8.5


and the Contact process
write the formula and give the names of common acids and


alkalis (HCI, HNO3, CH3COOH, NaOH, KOH, NH3)


describe the theory of acids and bases
describe strong acids and strong bases and weak acids and
weak bases in terms of fully dissociated or partially

dissociated
describe acidic, alkaline and neutral solutions in terms of pH

explain qualitatively the differences in behaviour of strong and

weak acids in terms of electrical conductivity, universal

indicator, pH and reactivity with reactive metals

describe neutralisation reactions in terms of +



sketch pH titration curves using combinations of strong and

weak acids with strong and weak alkalis


select suitable indicators for acid-alkali titrations using data

provided.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Discuss with another learner how to measure the course of a chemical reaction where a gas is


produced. Give at least two different methods. Which one of these is better and why?
Take it in turn to explain these chemical terms to another learner:

rate of reaction
collision theory
limiting reactant
activation energy
kinetic energy
frequency of collisions


Discuss these questions with another learner:
Why does increasing the pressure in a chemical reaction involving gases increase the rate of


reaction?


Why does a decrease in temperature lead to a decrease in the rate of a chemical reaction?
When reacted with 20 cm? of 1.0 mol hydrochloric acid, why does 5 g of zinc powder


react faster than a single 5 g piece of zinc?
How confident are you at sketching and interpreting graphs showing how the volume of gas


produced in a reaction changes with time?
Sketch a graph to show how the volume of carbon dioxide gas changes with time when excess
calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid of two different concentrations (1.0 mol and


2.0 mol Compare your graph with other members of the class.
How confident are you at plotting a graph and determining the gradient? Try this: Plot a graph of


volume of gas against time using this data.


 


 


Table 9.1: Information table for Question 5.


 
Then calculate the initial gradient (4) of this graph. Compare the value of your gradient with other



learners.

SLOWING THE RATE CAN BE IMPORTANT



 
Figure 9.1: a The reactions that produce firework explosions need to take place in a fraction of a second. b Corrosion


of some metals, such as the rusting of iron, is a much slower reaction.


 
As Figure 9.1 shows, some chemical reactions are very fast (they have a high rate of reaction) and
others are much slower. Some reactions are not very useful to us: for example, rusting of iron,
decomposition of wood, and browning of foodstuffs. The rate of a chemical reaction depends on many
things. Rusting takes place very slowly in dry air. It takes much longer for iron to rust in the dry desert
compared with the much faster rusting which takes place in seawater. The rate of rusting also depends
on pH: faster rusting occurs at low pH values (green rust) and high pH values (red rust). There are
several other things that speed up or slow down chemical reactions. One of the most obvious is the
effect of temperature. Unwanted oxidation reactions such as the browning of foods can be slowed


down by reducing the temperature.
Change in temperature has a great effect on biological and chemical molecules in plants and animals.
Increasing the temperature makes respiration faster and the chemical reactions in our body
(metabolism) also speed up. But if the temperature is too high (over about 40 °C) the rate of enzyme-
catalysed reactions in our bodies starts to decrease because the structure of the enzymes and other
proteins in the body is changed. If the temperature is too low, the rate of metabolism gets too low and


we may get hypothermia, where the body temperature drops to a dangerously low level.
But in some cases, low body temperatures can be useful. During some surgical operations patients are
cooled down to help lower the rate of respiration and rate of blood flow. Lowering the temperature of
the blood improves the chances of survival in complex heart operations such as cardiac bypass
surgery. The cooled blood is passed through a heart—lung machine which keeps the blood flowing
through the body. The temperature of the body is gradually lowered from 37 °C to 30—32 °C. This
lowers the rate of reactions in the body and protects the brain and other organs from damage while


the heart is stopped during surgery.


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e If left in the open, food usually goes bad because of oxidation or decomposition reactions. Which


foods go bad quickly? What can we do to stop food going bad?
e In places that have seasons which are very cold, some animals lower their body temperature. What


is the advantage of this?
Make a list of other reactions that are very fast or very slow. Compare your answers with other

groups.



9.1 Rate of reaction
The study of rates of chemical reactions is called reaction kinetics. The data we gather from rate
experiments can tell us a lot about how reactions take place. We can then make deductions about the
mechanism of a reaction. The balanced chemical equation gives us no information about the rate of a
reaction. Experiments are needed to measure the rate at which reactants are used up or products are


formed.


The rate of a reaction can be defined as follows:


rate = change in amount of reactants or products


 


time
Units of concentration are usually expressed in mol Units of time are usually expressed in seconds.
So, the units of rate of reaction are normally mol For very slow reactions, you may see the


units of rates expressed as mol or mol


Question


the following rates into the units of mol s7?:


a g of I, consumed in 1.00 h in a reaction mixture of volume 1 dm?. (A,[I] = 127)


b g ethanoate formed in 1.00 min from a reaction mixture of volume 400 cm3.


(M, = 88.0)


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 9.1


 


Methods for following the course of a reaction
In order to find out how the rate of reaction changes with time, we need to select a suitable method to
follow the progress of a reaction. This method will measure either the rate of disappearance of a
reactant, or the rate of appearance of a product. There are two main types of method: sampling and


continuous.



This method involves taking small samples of the reaction mixture at various times and then carrying


out a chemical analysis on each sample. An example is the alkaline hydrolysis of bromobutane:


+ > + Br ~
Samples are removed at various times and ‘quenched’ to stop or slow down the reaction, e.g. by
cooling the sample in ice. The hydroxide ion concentration can be found by titration with a standard


solution of a strong acid.


2 Continuous
In this method a physical property of the reaction mixture is monitored over a period of time. Some
examples are using colorimetry, a conductivity meter or measuring changes in gas volume or gas


pressure.


 
Figure 9.2: We can use a colorimeter to monitor the progress of a reaction. It measures the transmission of light
through a ‘cell’ containing the reaction mixture. The less concentrated the colour of the reaction mixture, the more


light is transmitted through the ‘cell’.


 
Colorimetry can be used to monitor the change in colour of a particular reactant (Figure 9.2). For


example, we can use this method to follow the reaction of iodine with propanone:
CH3COCH3 + + HI


As the reaction proceeds, the colour of the iodine fades.
Changes in electrical conductivity of a solution can also be measured. For example, we can use this


method to follow the reaction:


(CH3)3CBr + > + +
As the reaction proceeds, the electrical conductivity of the solution increases because ions are being
formed in the reaction. This method can sometimes be used even if there are ions on both sides of the
equation, because ions vary in their conductivities. For example, the small Ht and ions have very


high conductivities but ions have a low conductivity.
We can measure changes in gas volume or gas pressure. For example, we can use this method to


follow the reaction of benzenediazonium chloride, with water.


+ + +
We can monitor the reaction by measuring the change in volume of gas released with time. You may
have used this method to follow the rate of the reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric
acid. If you did, you will have measured the change in volume of carbon dioxide gas released with time


(Figure 9.3).
The progress of some reactions can be followed by measuring small changes in the volume of the


reaction mixture. For example, during the hydration of methylpropene, the volume decreases.



+ +


 
Figure 9.3: We can follow the rate of reaction by measuring the change in volume of a gas given off in a reaction. In

this experiment, CO2 is being given off when CaCO3 reacts with HCl.




An instrument called a dilatometer (Figure 9.4) is used to measure the small changes in volume. The


temperature has to be controlled to an accuracy of +0.001 °C. Can you think why?
bulb holding
the reaction


mixture


 


 


 


Figure 9.4: A dilatometer.


 


 
Question
2 Suggest a suitable method for following the progress of each of these reactions:
+ + +
HCOOCH3(aq) + HCOOH(aq) +
+ +


iv + 5Br ~(aq) + 6H*(aq) > +


b is it essential to keep the temperature constant when measuring the progress of a reaction?


Calculating rate of reaction graphically
Rate of reaction usually changes as the reaction proceeds. This is because the concentration of reactants is


decreasing. Taking the isomerisation of cyclopropane to propene as an example:

| ————> CH,CH =
/



cyclopropane propene
We can follow the progress of this reaction by measuring the decrease in concentration of cyclopropane or
increase in concentration of propene. Table 9.2 shows these changes at 500 °C. The measurements were


all made at the same temperature because reaction rate is greatly affected by temperature.


 
Table 9.2: Concentrations of reactant (cyclopropane) and product (propene) at 5-minute intervals (temperature = 500 °C


(773 K)).


 
Note that we put square brackets, [ ], around the cyclopropane and propene to indicate concentration:


[propene] means ‘concentration of propene’.


Figure 9.5 shows how the concentration of propene changes with time.
  
  


 
  
  
  
   


 


 


 
a 1.65 b
1.44 0.4-

4
2

2
064
2 2
a a

0.24
y 1 0 -


0 10 20 30 40 5


Time/min Time/ min
Figure 9.5: How the concentration of propene changes with time in the reaction cyclopropane propene. a the whole
curve. b The first part of the curve magnified. Line A shows the average rate over the first 5 minutes. Line B shows the


actual initial rate found by drawing a tangent at the start of the curve.


 
We can see from Figure 9.5b that the concentration of propene increases from 0.00 to 0.27 mol in the
first 5 minutes. In Section 6.1 we used the symbol A (Greek capital ‘delta’) to represent a change ina


particular quantity. So we can write:
Alpropene]


Atime ~ 5


= 0.054 mol min!


rate ofreaction =
This gives the average rate of reaction over the first 5 minutes. You will notice, however, that the graph is a
curve which becomes shallower with time. So the rate decreases with time. By measuring the change in
concentration over shorter and shorter time intervals we get an increasingly accurate value of the reaction
rate. If we make the time interval over which we measure the reaction almost zero, we obtain a reaction
rate at a particular instant. We do this by drawing tangents at particular points on the curve. Line B in
Figure 9.5b shows a tangent drawn at the start of the curve. This gives a much more accurate value of the


initial rate of reaction.


WORKED EXAMPLE

 
Figure 9.6 shows how to draw a tangent and calculate the rate at a particular point on a curve. In
this case, we are using a graph of concentration of cyclopropane against time.



1.6

the slope at 10 min gives


1.4 the rate of loss of cyclopropane


10 min after the start


   


1.2


1.0


0.8


0.6


[cyclopropane]


 
10 20 30 40


Time/ min
Figure 9.6: The rate of decrease of cyclopropane concentration over time as the reaction proceeds. The rate of


reaction at a given time can be found by drawing a tangent and measuring the gradient.


 


Procedure
Step 1: Select a point on the graph corresponding to a particular time (10 minutes in this


example).
Step 2: Draw a straight line at this point so that it just touches the line. The two angles


between the straight line and the curve should look very similar.


Step 3: Extend the tangent to meet the axes of the graph.
Step 4: Calculate the gradient (slope) of the tangent. This is a measure of the rate of reaction.


In this example the slope is:
0.00 — 1.40
35 x 60


—6.67 x mol


slope =
Note:
we convert the minutes to seconds by multiplying by 60


e the sign of the gradient is negative because the reactant concentration is decreasing
e the value of x mol refers to the rate of change of cyclopropane


concentration


e this is the rate of reaction when the cyclopropane concentration is 1.00 mol


 


Changes in rate as the reaction proceeds
As time passes, the concentration of cyclopropane falls. We can find the rate at different concentrations of
cyclopropane by drawing tangents at several points on the graph. Figure 9.7 shows how this is done for
cyclopropane concentrations of 1.50 mol (the initial rate), 1.00 mol and 0.50 mol The


data is summarised in Table 9.3.
  
   
 
  
  


    


rate at concentration = 1.5mol


 

 
1.4 =
25 x60
1.2 rate at concentration = 1.0 mol
is 6.67 x
= 35 x 60
rate at concentration =
5 0.8 0.5 mol
2 06 is
2 52.5 x60 mol
S 0.4

2

0.2


0.0
0 10 20 30 40 50


Time/min


Figure 9.7: Calculation of the rate of decrease of cyclopropane concentration, made at regular intervals.


 


Table 9.3: Rates of decrease for cyclopropane at different concentrations, calculated from Figure 9.7.


 


 
A graph of rate of reaction against concentration of cyclopropane (Figure 9.8) shows us that the rate is
directly proportional to the concentration of cyclopropane. So, if the concentration of cyclopropane is
doubled the rate of reaction is doubled. If the concentration of cyclopropane falls by one-third, the rate of


reaction falls by one-third.



o




2



2


 


Rate of decrease of
0.5 1.0 15


Figure 9.8: The rate of decrease of cyclopropane. Note how the gradient (rate / concentration) is constant.


 
Question


3 a i Plot the data in Table 9.2 for increase in propene concentration with time.
Calculate the rate after 10 minutes (when the propene concentration is 0.50 mol dm~3) by


drawing a tangent.
b the same method to calculate the rate of reaction at propene concentrations of 0.00 mol dm

0.30 mol and 0.90 mol
c i Calculate the concentration of cyclopropane when the concentration of propene is 0.00,



0.30, 0.50 and 0.90 mol


Plot a graph of rate of reaction against [cyclopropane]. Note that the graph is for
cyclopropane concentration not [propene] as it is the concentration of the reactant that is


affecting the rate, not the product.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 9.2


The reaction between calcium carbonate and hydrochloric acid
By collecting data and then analysing it, we can work out the relationship between the rate of reaction
and concentration of reactant. In this case we are going to use the apparatus shown in Figure 9.9 to
collect data about the reaction between marble chips (calcium carbonate) and hydrochloric acid. The


marble chips are in excess.


CaCO3(s) + + CO2(g) +


Procedure


 


Figure 9.9: Apparatus needed to measure the volume of gas given off in the reaction.


 
up the apparatus as shown in Figure 9.9 but remove the stopper from the flask and set the


syringe to zero.
Put about 10 g of large marble chips into the flask. Each marble chip should be about the same


size and weigh g.
Put 20 cm? of acid into the flask and leave for two seconds for the solution to become saturated

with carbon dioxide.


Put the stopper on the flask and immediately start a stopclock.
Record the volume of the gas in the syringe every 30 s until there is no further change in volume.
Record your results in a table with these headings:
e time/s


e volume of gas / cm?


e final volume of gas — volume of gas at time t (V; — V, ) /
The hydrochloric acid is the limiting reactant. As the reaction proceeds, the concentration of the
hydrochloric acid decreases. V; — V; is proportional to the concentration of hydrochloric acid at each


time, t.
Plot a graph of V; — against time, t, and look at its shape. This will give us information about the


kinetics of the reaction (see Chapter 22).


 
Think about what you have learned so far. Explain to another learner how you can determine the


initial rate of reaction from the experimental results of a reaction which produces a gas.


Work with another learner to list the different ways of following the rate of reaction.


What obstacles did your partner help you overcome?


 


Collision theory
When we explain the effects of concentration, temperature, surface area and catalysts on rates of reaction,
we use the collision theory. Collision theory states that in order to react with each other, particles must
collide in the correct orientation and with sufficient energy. The particles might be atoms, ions or


molecules.
When reactant particles collide they may simply bounce off each other, without changing. This is called an
ineffective collision. An ineffective collision takes place if the colliding particles do not have enough
energy to react. No reaction occurs. If the reactant particles do have enough energy to react, they may
change into product particles when they collide. This is called an effective collision (or successful


collision) (Figure 9.10).


 


no reaction



68




 
successful collision
with sufficient energy


to result in a reaction


Figure 9.10: a Ineffective (unsuccessful) and b effective (successful) collisions.


 
The minimum energy that colliding particles must possess for a collision to be effective is called the


activation energy, for that particular reaction.
We can show the activation energy for an exothermic reaction and an endothermic reaction on reaction


pathway diagrams, as in Figures 9.11 and 9.12.
      
  

    

activation energy: start-up energy

2 ‘pump-priming’

= reactants y the reaction



a



=


products
0 >


Reaction pathway

Figure 9.11: The activation energy in an exothermic reaction.




   
 
   

    






2 products


activation
energy


| reactants


Reaction pathway


Figure 9.12: The activation energy in an endothermic reaction.


 


According to the collision theory, a reaction will speed up if:
the frequency of collisions increases


e the proportion of particles with energy greater than the activation energy increases.


The frequency of collisions is the number of collisions per unit time, e.g. number of collisions per second.
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a reaction but remains chemically unchanged itself at
the end of the reaction. A catalyst does this by making it possible for the particles to react by an
alternative mechanism. This alternative mechanism has a lower activation energy (see Figure 9.13). You


can read more about catalysts in Section 9.4.
 
 
    
 
  
     


 
uncatalysed
reaction
reactants
catalysed


reaction


Enthalpy,


products


 
>


0 Reaction pathway


Figure 9.13: The effect of a catalyst on the activation energy in an exothermic reaction.


 


Question
4 set of apparatus that could be used to follow the course of the reaction shown in


Figure 9.9.
b do we mean by:
i the activation energy of a reaction?
ii
c does a catalyst work? Select the correct answer from the list below.
A increasing the frequency of collisions
decreasing the activation energy


C by increasing the activation energy.
the collision theory to explain how increasing the surface area of a solid reactant increases


the rate of reaction.


9.2 The effect of concentration on rate of reaction


IMPORTANT
Remember that increase in concentration of a reactant increases rate because it increases the
frequency of the collisions. It is not enough to write ‘there are more collisions’. You must include an


idea of collisions per second. Frequency is a number (of something) per second.


 
In chemistry, we usually measure the concentration of solutions in moles per decimetre cubed: mol
The more concentrated a solution, the greater the number of particles of solute dissolved in a given
volume of solvent. In reactions involving solutions, more concentrated reactants have a faster rate of
reaction. This is because the random motion of the particles in solution results in more frequent collisions


between reacting particles. This is shown in Figure 9.14.
The effect of pressure in reactions involving gases is similar to the effect of concentration in solutions. As
we increase the pressure of reacting gases, there are more gas molecules in a given volume. This results in


more collisions in any given time, and a faster rate of reaction.


 


 
Figure 9.14: The particles in box a are closer together than those in box b. There are more particles in the same volume,
so the chances and frequency of collisions between reacting particles are increased. Therefore, the rate of reaction is


greater in box a than in box b.


 


Questions
5 Dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with marble chips (calcium carbonate), giving off carbon dioxide

gas. Which solution of acid will have the fastest initial rate of reaction?

cm? of 0.5 mol


cm? of 1.0 mol
C 25 of 0.5 mol


your answer to part a.
Which one of these explanations about the effect of increasing the concentration of the reactants on

the rate of reaction is completely correct?
The particles have more energy and collide with a greater frequency


B_ The particles are closer together and there are more collisions.
The particles are closer together and collide more frequently.

D
The particles have a greater collision rate because they collide more effectively.


9.3 The effect of temperature on rate of reaction
To fully understand rates of reaction, we need to look more closely at the energy possessed by the reactant


particles.
In a sample of any substance, at a given temperature, the particles will not all possess the same amount of
energy as each other. A few particles will have a relatively small amount of energy. A few particles will have
a relatively large amount of energy. Most particles will have an amount of energy somewhere in between.
The distribution of energies at a given temperature can be shown on a graph (see Figure 9.15). This is


called the Boltzmann distribution.
 
  


   
the shaded area shows the
proportion of molecules in
the sample that have enough
energy to cause a chemical


change when they collide


o Number of molecules


 


>
Molecul


and above this energy
the molecules have enough


energy to collide effectively


Figure 9.15: The Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies, showing the activation energy.


 
n Figure 9.15, the activation energy, is labelled. We have seen that the activation energy is defined as
he minimum energy required for colliding particles to react. When we raise the temperature of a reaction
mixture, the average kinetic (movement) energy of the particles increases. Particles in solution and in
gases will move around more quickly at a higher temperature, resulting in more frequent collisions.
However, experiments show us that the effect of temperature on rate of reaction cannot be totally
explained by more frequent collisions. The key factor is that the proportion of successful collisions
increases greatly as we increase the temperature. The distribution of molecular energies changes as we
raise the temperature, as shown in Figure 9.16. The curve showing the Boltzmann distribution at the higher


emperature flattens and the peak shifts to the right.
The area under the curve represents the number of particles. The shaded area shows the number of
particles with energy greater than the activation energy, E,. For a 10 °C rise in temperature this area under


he curve approximately doubles, as does the rate of many reactions.


 
when the sample is heated, the mean energy of the


molecules increases. There is a wider spread of values
  
  
  
 


    
a greater proportion of
molecules than before exceed
the activation energy, so


increasing rate of reaction


© Number of molecules


   


 


>


and above this energy Molecular energy
the molecules have enough


energy to collide effectively
Figure 9.16: The Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies at temperatures T °C and (T + 10) °C, showing the


activation energy.


 


Therefore, increasing the temperature increases the rate of reaction because:
the increased energy results in particles moving around more quickly, which increases the frequency of


collisions
the proportion of successful collisions (i.e. those that result in a reaction) increases because the


proportion of particles exceeding the activation energy increases. This is the more important factor.
IMPORTANT


Remember that increasing temperature increases the rate of reaction because of two factors:
frequency of effective collisions is greater because of the greater kinetic energy of the


molecules


proportion of the molecules have kinetic energy greater than the activation energy.


The second reason has a far greater effect.


 
Question

7 What is the Boltzmann distribution?
b why a 10 °C rise in temperature can approximately double the rate of a reaction.


9.4 Catalysis


IMPORTANT
Catalysts increase the rate because they make the reaction go by a different reaction pathway


(mechanism) that has a lower activation energy than the uncatalysed reaction.


 
In Figure 9.13 we saw how a catalyst works by providing an alternative mechanism (or reaction pathway)


with a lower activation energy. We can show this on a Boltzmann distribution (see Figure 9.17).
Note that the presence of a catalyst does not affect the shape of the Boltzmann distribution. However, by
providing a lower activation energy, a greater proportion of molecules in the reaction mixture have
sufficient energy to react. The shaded area under the curve represents the numbers of molecules that have
energy greater than the activation energy of the reaction. The total shaded area (including both the light
and dark shading) under the curve shows the number of particles with energy greater than the activation
energy with the catalyst present This area is much larger than the dark shaded area for the
reaction without a catalyst. Therefore, the rate at which effective collisions occur, and so the rate of the


catalysed reaction, is greatly increased compared with the rate of the uncatalysed reaction.
 
          


      
coloured areas indicate the proportion


of molecules whose energy exceeds
the activation energies and


molecules with
these low energies


cannot react


Number of molecules


  


Molecular energy
Figure 9.17: The Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies, showing the change in activation energy with and without


a catalyst.


 


Question


8 one of these statements about the Boltzmann curve is correct?
The Boltzmann curve shows that for most reactions, most particles have energies greater than


the activation energy.
The Boltzmann curve shows the total number of particles on the y-axis and the activation energy


on the x-axis.
When the temperature of a chemical reaction is increased the highest point on the Boltzmann


curve is still the same.
temperature, the area under the Boltzmann curve above the activation energy is


greater for a catalysed reaction than for the same uncatalysed reaction.


REFLECTION


Try to remember all the key words and definitions that you have come across in this chapter.


Explain them to another learner.
Compare your lists of key words and definitions with those of another learner. Which ones did you


miss out? Were these more difficult ones to explain?


 


Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts
When a catalyst and the reactants in a catalysed reaction are in the same phase, we describe the catalyst
as a homogeneous catalyst. For example, we can describe a catalyst as homogeneous if it is dissolved in


water and the reactants are also present as an aqueous solution.
If the catalyst is in a different phase to the reactants, we describe the catalyst as a heterogeneous catalyst.
You have probably met an example of heterogeneous catalysis when making oxygen gas. The reaction


commonly used in the laboratory is the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide solution:


2H202(aq) > + O2(g) slow reaction
This is a very slow reaction at room temperature. However, when a little of the insoluble solid


manganese(IV) oxide powder, is added, oxygen is given off quickly (Figure 9.18).


+ fast reaction
At the end of the reaction, when no more gas is being released, you can recover the solid catalyst by

filtering off the water and drying the black powder of manganese(IV) oxide.
Many heterogeneous catalysts are solids that catalyse gaseous reactants. The reactions take place on the

surface of the solid catalyst. There are many examples in industry, including the iron catalyst used in the


manufacture of ammonia from nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas, and the nickel catalyst used when adding


hydrogen gas to vegetable oils to make margarine.


 
Figure 9.18: a A solution of hydrogen peroxide at room temperature. b The solution of hydrogen peroxide with a little


manganese(IV) oxide added.


 


Question
9 a i Explain whether the reaction below is an example of heterogeneous catalysis or


homogeneous catalysis:



V20s(s)


2S02(g) + =
ii Explain how a catalyst increases the rate of reaction in terms of activation energy and the

distribution of molecular energies in a sample of reactants.
a reaction profile diagram to show a typical uncatalysed reaction and the catalysed version
of the reaction. On your diagram show the activation energy for the catalysed and uncatalysed
reactions.


SUMMARY


The rate of reaction can be found by drawing tangents to a curve of extent of reaction against time.
At higher concentration (or higher pressure), more frequent collisions occur between reactant molecules. This


increases the rate of reaction.
The activation energy of a reaction, is the minimum energy required by colliding particles for a collision to be


effective. Reaction pathway diagrams show how the activation energy provides a barrier to reaction.
At higher temperature, molecules have more kinetic energy, so a higher percentage of successful collisions occur


between reactant molecules.
The Boltzmann distribution represents the numbers of molecules in a sample with particular energies. The change
in the Boltzmann distribution as temperature is increased shows how more molecules have energy greater than the


activation energy. This in turn leads to an increase in reaction rate.
A catalyst increases the rate of a reaction by providing an alternative reaction pathway with lower activation energy.
More molecules have sufficient energy to react, so the rate of reaction is increased. The catalyst is not used up in


the reaction.


 


EXAM E QUESTIONS
carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid.


CaCO3(s) + > + +
The progress of the reaction was followed by measuring the volume of gas produced at particular


time intervals. The results are shown.


 


Plot a suitable graph of these results. Label the axes. [3]
b the initial rate of reaction by drawing a tangent. Show how you worked out [3]


your answer on the graph. Include the correct units.
c Describe how the rate of reaction changes with time and explain how you know this by [2]


referring to the line of the graph.
2
how to calculate the rate of reaction at 40 s.
The mass of calcium carbonate used was 0.1875 g. The volume of 0.100 mol
hydrochloric acid used was 40 M, CaCO3 = 100.1


4


Demonstrate by calculation that the calcium carbonate was the limiting reagent.
f of hydrochloric acid was doubled. On your graph draw a line to show [2]


how the rate of reaction changes with time.

[Total: 16]

2
2 a_ Explain why gases react together faster at higher pressure.

1
Explain why reactants in solution react faster at higher concentration.

2


c Explain why finely divided solids react more quickly than solid lumps.


[4]
Explain why raising the temperature increases the rate of reaction.


[Total: 9]


IMPORTANT


Remember that when writing questions about how rate of reaction changes with concentration or
temperature, it is important to use words like greater rate, faster reaction, increased rate. Do not


just write ‘it is fast’, ‘it is slow’.


 
3 Sketch a graph to show the Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies. Label the [4]


axes.
[2]


[2]
activation energy.


an area on the graph to show the number of molecules capable of reacting.
on your graph a possible activation energy for the same reaction in the presence of


a catalyst.
e Shade an area on the graph to show the additional number of molecules capable of


reacting because of the presence of a catalyst.
f curve on your graph to show the Boltzmann distribution of molecular [2]


energies at a slightly higher temperature.
[Total: 12]

4 The Haber process is used in industry to convert nitrogen and hydrogen to ammonia.
The formation of ammonia gas is exothermic.


 


SELF-EVALUATION


See

section...

explain and use the terms:

of reaction


frequency of collisions


effective and non-effective collisions
explain, in terms of frequency of effective collisions, the effect
of changes of concentration and pressure on the rate of


reaction
Needs


more work
Almost


there
Ready to


move on
use experimental data to calculate the rate of a reaction


9
explain the effect of temperature change on rate of reaction in
terms of frequency of the Boltzmann distribution and the


frequency of effective collisions

explain and use the terms catalyst and catalysis
explain how a catalyst works in terms of difference in

activation energy and difference in mechanism
explain the effect of catalysts in terms of the Boltzmann


distribution
construct and interpret a reaction pathway diagram in the

presence and absence of a catalyst.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START


these questions with another learner.
Substance X does not conduct electricity when solid but conducts when molten. What type of
bonding is present in this structure? Suggest two other physical properties of X, giving reasons


for your answers.
Substance Y has a very high melting point and does not conduct electricity when molten. What


type of structure is Y? Suggest one other physical property of Y, giving reasons for your answer.
In Chapter 2 you learned about first ionisation energy. Discuss with another learner how first
ionisation energy changes across Period 2 and the reasons for this. Be prepared to explain your


answers to the class.
In Chapter 2 you also learned about how atomic radius changes across a period and down a group.
Describe and explain these patterns to another learner. In return, get the other learner to describe


and explain how ionic radius changes across a period and down a group.
In Chapter 7 you learned about oxidation numbers. Describe and explain to another learner the
change in oxidation numbers of the elements in their oxides belonging to Groups 1, 2 and 13 to 17.
In return, get the other learner to describe and explain the variation in oxidation numbers of the


chlorides in Groups 13 to 17.
Take it in turn to explain these chemical terms to another learner:
acid
Brgnsted-Lowry base
electronegativity


amphoteric oxide
Make a list of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides. Compare your list with other members of the


class.


ARRANGING THE ELEMENTS


 
The chemical elements that we know were gradually discovered over many thousands of years. The
first metal elements used by early humans, e.g. copper, gold, were found naturally. Evidence from the
Middle East and Africa suggests that copper was extracted by heating with charcoal over 7000 years
ago. Humans were extracting lead in Africa over 6000 years ago and over 5000 years ago, people
were extracting iron from iron ore in Egypt. The progress in extracting other elements was slow until
about 260-220 years ago when there was a sudden increase in the ‘discovery’ of new elements.
Elements such as hydrogen, chlorine and manganese were ‘discovered’ in this period. A little later

(1807), sodium and potassium were isolated by electrolysis.
Because so many elements were then known, chemists started to group them together and link them
to their ‘atomic weights’. Johann Débereiner and John Newlands produced tables which showed that
there was a relationship between the properties of some elements and their ‘atomic weights’. It was
not until 1869 that the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev arranged the elements into the Periodic
Table that we know today (Figure 10.1). He organised the elements known at that time in order of their
atomic mass, arranging elements with similar properties into vertical columns. He left gaps where the
pattern broke down, arguing that these spaces would eventually be filled by as yet undiscovered
elements. For example, he left a space below silicon, and he made predictions of how the ‘new’



element would behave when it was discovered. He also changed the order of elements in places where
similar elements did not quite line up in columns based on atomic mass. These apparent
inconsistencies resulted in some of his fellow chemists doubting the importance of his table, but they
were convinced following the discovery of germanium in 1886. Germanium closely matched the


properties that Mendeleev had predicted for the ‘new’ element below silicon, using his Periodic Table.


 
Figure 10.1: a Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907). b This version of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table is on the building in St


Petersburg where he worked.


 
In the 20th and 21st centuries, further elements, many of which exist for only a few seconds because
they are radioactively unstable, have been added to the Periodic Table. Many of these have been
discovered by female scientists such as Marie Curie (radium and polonium), Lisa Meitner
(protactinium) and Marguerite Perey (francium). One of the latest elements to be discovered is


tennessine, which has an atomic number of 117. Which group is this in?


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
Why do you think that elements such as copper and lead were the first to be extracted but it was


not until about 200 years ago that sodium and potassium were extracted?
e Neither the noble gases nor the radioactive elements in Period 7 appear in Mendeleev’s table
because they had not been discovered. What features of these elements do you think made their


discovery difficult?


 


10.1 Structure of the Periodic Table
We now know that the chemical elements are arranged in the Periodic Table in order of atomic number, not
atomic mass as first thought. This explains why Mendeleev had to re-order some elements in his table
(which was developed before scientists knew about the structure of the atom). The modern Periodic Table
is shown in Figure 10.3 in Section 10.2. There are 18 groups (vertical columns) in the Periodic Table. The
rows across the table are called periods. In this chapter we will be looking for patterns going across the
third period, from sodium (Na) to argon (Ar). The patterns seen across Period 3 are seen across other


periods, too. This recurrence of the same pattern is called periodicity.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
17 18
2
He

40
3 4 6 8 9
li Be atomic symbol F Ne
name neon
69 90 atomic mass 120 16.0 19.0 202
2 4 16 18
Na Mg Si a Ar
magnesium
u 28.1
19 20 32 35 36
K Ca Ge Se Br Kr
39.1 40.1 79.0 799 38
7 38 50 53 54
Rb Sr Ag Sn Te Xe
|
1079 127.6 | 1269 | 1313
79 82 86
Gs Ba Au Pb Po At Rn

1373 207.2 - -

Ts Og

lanthanoids


actinoids


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


Figure 10.3: The Periodic Table of the elements. A larger version of the Periodic Table can be found in Appendix 1.


 


IMPORTANT


The latest accepted form of the Periodic Table has groups numbered from 1 to 18. The transition
elements are given group numbers. It is easy to change the old Groups III to VIII into the modern form.


You just add 10. So Group becomes Group 13 and Group VII becomes 17.


 
Question
at the Periodic Table in Figure 10.3.


element is found in Period 4, Group 17?
The relative atomic masses of tellurium (Te) and iodine are 128 and 127, respectively. Why did


this present a problem to Mendeleev when he was constructing his Periodic Table?
Why are the elements in Groups 1 and 2 known as ‘s-block elements’, whereas those in Group 17


are called ‘p-block elements’?

 



10.2 Periodicity of physical properties


Periodic patterns of atomic radii
We can compare the size of different atoms using their atomic radii. The data for these measurements can


come from an single covalent radius (Figure 10.2).


covalent radius
Figure 10.2: The distance between the two nuclei of the same type of atom can be determined and then divided by two


to arrive at the atomic (single covalent) radius.


 
There are other measures of atomic radii, such as metallic radii and van der Waals’ radii. However,
covalent radii can be obtained for most elements, so these provide the best data for comparison purposes


across a period.
The values of the atomic radii of the elements in Period 3 are given in Table 10.1. We can see the pattern


across the period more clearly on a graph (Figure 10.4).


 
Table 10.1: The atomic (single covalent) radii of Period 3 elements (no data are available for argon). The units are


nanometres, where 1 nm =


 


IMPORTANT
The atomic radius decreases across a period because the increasingly positive nuclear charge pulls the


electrons in the outer shell closer to the nucleus.


 
The atoms of the noble gases in Group 18, such as argon in Period 3, do not have a covalent radius, as they
do not form bonds with each other. Their atomic radii can be determined from their van der Waals’ radius.
This is found by measuring the distance between the nuclei of two neighbouring, touching atoms which are
not chemically bonded together. This distance is divided by two to give the van der Waals’ radius. This
figure will be higher than the single covalent radius of any given element, as there is no overlap of electron

clouds involved in the van der Waals’ radius.
The atomic radius decreases across Period 3, as shown in Figure 10.4. The same pattern is also found in
other periods. Across a period, the number of protons (and so the nuclear charge) and the number of
electrons increases by one with each successive element. The extra electron added to the atoms of each
successive element occupies the same principal quantum shell (energy level). This means that the
shielding effect remains roughly constant (see Section 2.2), so the greater attractive force exerted by the
increasing positive nuclear charge on the outer (valence) shell electrons pulls them in closer to the
nucleus. For this reason, the atomic radius decreases across the period.


0.10


Atomic

 

+


13 14 15 16 17 18
Na Mg Al Si P Cl Ar


Atomic number
Figure 10.4: Plotting the atomic radii (single covalent radii) against atomic number for the elements in Period 3 (argon


not included).


 


Periodic patterns of ionic radii


IMPORTANT


The ionic radius decreases across a period as the positive charge on the ion increases and the
negative charge on the ion decreases. This is because the increasingly positive nuclear charge pulls
the electrons in the outer shell closer to the nucleus. In the same period, the negative ions have larger
ionic radii than the positive ions because they have one more electron shell, so the outer electrons are


further from the nucleus and there is more shielding.


 
From your work in Chapter 4, you will know that the atoms of metallic elements produce positively charged
ions (called cations), such as Na*. By contrast, the atoms of non-metallic elements form negatively
charged ions (called anions), such as Cl~. What pattern in ionic radii do we see going across Period 3? The


data are shown in Table 10.2 and are displayed graphically in Figure 10.5.


 


Table 10.2: The ionic radii of Period 3 elements (no data are available for argon).


 
The positively charged ions have effectively lost their outer shell of electrons (the third principal quantum
shell or energy level) from their original atoms. For this reason, the cations are much smaller than their
atoms. To add to this effect, there is also less shielding of the outer electrons in these cations compared


with their original atoms.
Going across the period, from Na* to the ions get smaller for reasons similar to those for the
decreasing atomic radii across a period. The increasing nuclear charge attracts the outermost (valence-
shell) electrons in the second principal quantum shell (energy level) closer to the nucleus with increasing


atomic number.
The negatively charged ions are larger than their original atoms. This is because each atom will have
gained one or more extra electrons into their third principal quantum shell. This increases the repulsion
between its electrons, while the nuclear charge remains constant. This increases the size of any anion


compared with its atom.


0.30-




lonic


0.10-


 

 

1


13 14 16
Ar


Atomic number


Figure 10.5: Plotting the ionic radii against atomic number for the elements in Period 3 (argon not included).


 


The anions decrease in size, going from to as the nuclear charge increases across the period.


Question
2 at the elements in Period 2 of the Periodic Table in Appendix 1. Using your knowledge of Period 3


elements, predict and explain the relative sizes of:
the atomic radii of lithium and fluorine
b atom and its ion, Li*


atom and its ion,


ion, and a fluoride ion,


Periodic patterns of melting points and electrical conductivity
Physical properties, such as the melting point and electrical conductivity of the elements, also show trends
across a period. Again, using Period 3 as an example, we can show the data in tables and on graphs (see


Tables 10.3 and 10.4 and the graph in Figure 10.6).
sodium magnesium aluminium silicon sulfur chlorine argon


(Na) (Mg) (Al) (Si) (P) (S) (Cl) (Ar)


Table 10.3: The melting points of Period 3 elements (measured in kelvin, K, where 0 °C = 273 K).
sodium magnesium | aluminium | silicon phosphorus | sulfur | chlorine | argon


(Na) (Mg) (Al) (Si) (P) (S) (Cl) (Ar)


 


 


y 2x
Table 10.4: The electrical conductivity of Period 3 elements (measured in siemens per metre, S where siemens are


proportional to the ease with which electrons can pass through a material).


 


 
The electrical conductivity increases across the metals of Period 3 from sodium (Group 1) to aluminium
(Group 13). The electrical conductivity then drops dramatically to silicon, which is described as a


semiconductor, and falls even further to the non-metallic insulators phosphorus and sulfur.
To explain the trend in melting points and electrical conductivity across a period, we have to consider the

bonding and structure of the elements (see Table 10.5).




sodium magnesium | aluminium | silicon (Si) phosphorus | sulfur (S) chlorine argon (Ar)


(Na) (Mg) (Al) (P) (Cl)


metallic | metallic metallic covalent covalent covalent covalent
giant giant giant giant simple simple simple simple


metallic | metallic metallic molecular | molecular molecular molecular molecular


Table 10.5: The bonding and structures of Period 3 elements.


 


 
Sodium, magnesium and aluminium, at the start of Period 3, are all metallic elements. As you saw in
Section 4.6, their metallic bonding can be described as positive ions arranged in a giant lattice held
together by a ‘sea’ of delocalised electrons. The delocalised electrons are those from the outermost
(valence) shell. These delocalised electrons are free to move around within the structure of the metal.
When a potential difference is applied, the delocalised electrons drift through the metal towards the
positive terminal. Both the melting point and the electrical conductivity increase from sodium to
magnesium to aluminium. This can be explained by the number of electrons each metal donates into the
‘sea’ of delocalised electrons and the increasing charge on the metal ions in the giant metallic lattice. Each
sodium atom donates just one electron, forming Nat ions in the lattice, whereas each aluminium atom
donates three electrons, forming Al?* ions. This makes the metallic bonding in aluminium stronger, as the
electrostatic forces of attraction between its 3+ ions and the larger number of negatively charged
delocalised electrons holding the giant structure together are stronger. There are also more delocalised
electrons available to drift through the structure when aluminium metal conducts an electric current,


making aluminium a better electrical conductor than sodium.


1500-




Melting point /K





o




 

T T T T T T T


13 14 15 16 17 18
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar


Atomic number


Figure 10.6: Plotting the melting point against atomic number for the elements in Period 3.


 


IMPORTANT


The change in melting point across a period reflects the type of structure and bonding. As we go
across a period, the metals have increasingly strong metallic bonding and their melting points
increase. In Period 2 and Period 3, the Group 14 elements have giant covalent structures so have very
high melting points. In Groups 15 to 18, most of the elements have simple molecular structures so


have relatively low melting points.


 
The element in the centre of Period 3, silicon, has the highest melting point because of its giant molecular
structure (also called a giant covalent structure). Every silicon atom is held to its neighbouring silicon
atoms by strong covalent bonds. However, its electrical conductivity is much lower than the metals at the
start of the period because there are no delocalised electrons free to move around within its structure.


Silicon is classed as a semimetal, or metalloid.
The elements to the right of silicon are all non-metallic elements. They exist as relatively small molecules.
Sulfur exists as Sg molecules, phosphorus as P, molecules and chlorine as Cl, molecules. Although the
covalent bonds within each molecule are strong, there are only relatively weak instantaneous dipole-
induced dipole forces between their molecules (see Section 4.7). Therefore, it does not take much energy


to break these weak intermolecular forces and melt the elements. At room temperature, phosphorus and
sulfur are solids with low melting points and chlorine is a gas.
Argon gas exists as single atoms with very weak instantaneous dipole-induced dipole forces between these


atoms.
Question
3 Why does sulfur have a lower melting point than silicon?
b does sulfur have a higher melting point than chlorine?
Why is magnesium a better electrical conductor than:


i phosphorus?


ii sodium?


Periodic patterns of first ionisation energies
You have looked at the pattern in first ionisation energies for the first two periods in Section 2.6. In Period 3


the pattern is the same as in Period 2. This is shown by the data in Table 10.6 and the graph in Figure 10.7.


 


Table 10.6: The first ionisation energy (X(g) > X*(g) + e7) of Period 3 elements in kilojoules per mole (kJ


 


1500+


1000+


First ionisation


 

 

T T T T T


Na Mg Al Si Cl Ar
13 14 15 16


Atomic number

Figure 10.7: Plotting the first ionisation energy (X(g) X*(g) + against atomic number for the elements in Period 3.




There is a general increase in first ionisation energy across a period because the increasing nuclear
charge and decreasing atomic radius makes the attractive forces between the nucleus and outer
electrons greater. Remember that Group 13 and Group 16 elements may not obey this general rule


(see Chapter 2).


 
In general, the first ionisation energy increases across Period 3 as the positive nuclear charge increases
and electrons successively fill the third quantum shell. As electrons are in the same shell, the shielding
effect is similar in atoms of each element. There are small ‘dips’ in the general trend across the period
between Mg and Al, and between P and S. The same pattern appears in Period 2 for Be and B, and N and O.


The explanation given in Section 2.6 also applies here in Period 3.
Questions
the general trend in first ionisation energies across Period 3?
b why aluminium has a lower first ionisation energy than magnesium.
c Explain why sulfur has a lower first ionisation energy than phosphorus.
at Period 4 in the Periodic Table (Appendix 1).


The first ionisation energies of the p-block elements are given in the table below.


Predict the missing value for the first ionisation energy of selenium.
gallium (Ga)


germanium (Ge) 762


Table 10.7: Information table for Question 4.


 


 
5 one of these statements about the periodicity of the Period 3 elements is correct?


The melting points increase to Group 13 then decrease suddenly to low values for Groups 14-18.
B_ The bonding of the elements changes from metallic in Groups 1, 2 and 13 to covalent in Groups


14


The ionic radius decreases steadily from sodium to argon.
D_ The structure of the elements changes from metallic in Groups 1, 2 and 13 to simple molecular in


Groups 14 to 17.


REFLECTION
Work with another learner. Write down a list of the physical properties of the elements in Period 3
(Groups 1, 2 and 13-17 only) that helps distinguish them from some of the other elements in


Period 3.


Ask another learner to select one of these properties and one of the elements in Period 3.
Both of you write down how the value of this physical property compares with other elements in


the same period. Compare your answers.


Check how well did you did by comparing your answers with the information in the coursebook.


 


10.3 Periodicity of chemical properties
We will now look at the chemistry of some of the elements of Period 3 and their compounds, focusing on


the oxides and chlorides.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 10.1


 


Reactions of Period 3 elements with oxygen
Some of these experiments may be demonstrated by your teacher. Watch carefully to see what


happens and note down your observations.
reacts vigorously when heated and placed in a gas jar of oxygen. The sodium burns with a
bright yellow flame (Figure 10.8). The main product when sodium burns in a limited amount of


oxygen is a white solid, sodium oxide:


4Na(s) + O2(g)


 


Figure 10.8: Sodium reacts vigorously with oxygen gas.


 
2 also reacts vigorously when heated in oxygen, forming magnesium oxide. Aluminium
metal is protected by a layer of aluminium oxide, but powdered aluminium does react well with

oxygen. Both metals burn with bright white flames.
2Mg(s) + O2(g) 2MgO(s)


4Al(s) + 302(g) >
Silicon reacts slowly with oxygen to form silicon(IV) oxide (silicon dioxide):


Si(s) +
Phosphorus reacts vigorously with oxygen. A yellow or white flame is seen, and clouds of white


phosphorus(V) oxide are produced:


4P(s) + 503(g)
5 Sulfur powder, once ignited, burns gently with a blue flame in a gas jar of oxygen gas. Toxic fumes


of sulfur dioxide gas are produced (Figure 10.9):

S(s) + > SO2(g)
Further oxidation of sulfur dioxide gives sulfur trioxide. Their systematic names are sulfur(IV) oxide
and sulfur(VI) oxide, respectively.



catalyst


2S02(g) + = 2503(g)


and argon do not react with oxygen.


 


Figure 10.9: Sulfur burns gently in oxygen gas.


 


 


Reactions of Period 3 elements with chlorine
When sodium metal is heated then plunged into a gas jar of chlorine there is a vigorous reaction, forming


sodium chloride:
2Na(s) + 2NaCl(s)
Magnesium and aluminium also react vigorously with chlorine gas:
Mg(s) + >
+
Silicon reacts slowly with chlorine, as it does with oxygen, giving silicon(IV) chloride:
Si(s) + >
Phosphorus also reacts slowly with excess chlorine gas:


2P(s) + >
Sulfur does form chlorides, such as and but you do not need to cover these for your


examination.


Argon does not form a chloride.


Reactions of sodium and magnesium with water


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 10.2


 


Reaction of sodium and magnesium with water
Some of these experiments may be demonstrated by your teacher. Watch carefully to see what


happens and note down your observations.
reacts vigorously with cold water, melting into a ball of molten metal (Figure 10.10). It


moves across the surface of the water, giving off hydrogen gas. It quickly gets smaller and smaller


until it disappears, leaving a strongly alkaline solution (e.g. pH 14) of sodium hydroxide behind:


2Na(s) + 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)


 
Figure 10.10: There is a violent reaction when sodium is placed on a piece of filter paper floating on the surface of


water.


 
By contrast, fresh magnesium reacts extremely slowly with cold water, taking several days to
produce a test-tube of hydrogen gas. The solution formed is very weakly alkaline (e.g. pH 11), as
any magnesium hydroxide formed is only slightly soluble. Therefore, a lower concentration of OH
ions enters the solution compared with the result when sodium is added to water. This is


because sodium hydroxide is much more soluble in water than magnesium hydroxide.


Mg(s) + +
When heated, magnesium does react vigorously with water in the form of steam to make


magnesium oxide and hydrogen gas:


Mg(s) + MgO(s) + H2(g)


 
Question
6 a i The Group 1 metal lithium reacts in a similar way to sodium. It reacts with oxygen,
producing lithium oxide. Write the balanced symbol equation, including state symbols, for
this reaction.
ii Lithium also reacts with chlorine. Write the balanced symbol equation, including state
symbols, for this reaction.


b i The Group 2 metal calcium reacts more vigorously with cold water than magnesium does,
forming an alkaline solution. Write the balanced symbol equation, including state symbols,

for this reaction.
ii The solution formed when 0.01 mol of calcium react completely with 1 dm? of water is more
alkaline than the solution formed when 0.01 mol of magnesium react completely with 1 dm?
of water. Explain why.


10.4 Oxides of Period 3 elements


Oxidation numbers of oxides


Table 10.8 shows the formulae of some of the common oxides of the Period 3 elements.




Table 10.8: Oxidation numbers of the Period 3 elements in some common oxides. Chlorine has other oxides, such as Cl20,


in which its oxidation number is +1, and in which its oxidation number is +5.


 


 
The maximum oxidation number of each element rises as we cross the period. This happens because the
Period 3 element in each oxide can use all the electrons in its outermost shell in bonding to oxygen (ox. no.
= —2). They all exist in positive oxidation states because oxygen has a higher electronegativity than any of


the Period 3 elements. See Section 12.2 for more about electronegativity.
10.5 Effect of water on oxides and hydroxides of


Period 3 elements
The oxides of sodium and magnesium react with water to form hydroxides. The presence of excess
aqueous hydroxide ions, makes these solutions alkaline:


+


strongly alkaline solution, e.g. pH 14


MgO(s) + Mg(OH), (aq)


weakly alkaline solution, e.g. pH 10


 


Figure 10.11: The basic magnesium oxide or hydroxide reacts with acid in the stomach to form a salt plus water.


 
Magnesium oxide and magnesium hydroxide are commonly used in indigestion remedies (Figure 10.11).


These basic compounds neutralise excess acid in the stomach, relieving the pain:
MgO(s) + +


+ +
Aluminium oxide does not react or dissolve in water, which is why an oxide layer can protect aluminium


metal from corrosion. However, it does react and dissolve when added to acidic or alkaline solutions.
With acid:
Al,03(s) + > +
e With hot, concentrated alkali:
+ 2NaOH(aq) +
When aluminium oxide reacts with an acid it behaves like a base: it forms a salt (aluminium sulfate in the


example with dilute sulfuric acid above) plus water.
When it reacts with an alkali it behaves like an acid: reacting to form a salt (sodium tetrahydroxoaluminate


in the example with sodium hydroxide above).


Compounds that can act as both acids and bases, such as aluminium oxide, are called amphoteric.
Silicon dioxide is also insoluble in water. Water cannot break down its giant molecular structure. However, it


will react with and dissolve in hot, concentrated alkali:


+ 2NaOH(aq) > +
Silicon dioxide acts as an acid when it reacts with sodium hydroxide, forming a salt (sodium silicate) plus

water. It does not react with acids, so it is classed as an acidic oxide.
Phosphorus(V) oxide reacts vigorously and dissolves in water to form an acidic solution of phosphoric(V)
acid (pH 2):



+ >


phosphoric(V) acid


The oxides of sulfur, and SO3, both react and dissolve in water, forming acidic solutions (pH 1):


SO2(g) + H,O(1)


sulfurous acid (also known as sulfuric(IV) acid)
+ +


acid


 


The effect of bonding and electronegativity on the structure and acidic / basic nature of Period 3 oxides
Table 10.9 shows a summary of the acidic / basic nature of the Period 3 oxides. You need to know this
summary for your examination. We can explain the behaviour of the oxides by looking at their structure


and bonding (Table 10.10 and Figure 10.12).


 


Table 10.9: The acid / base nature of some Period 3 oxides.
good good good none none none
giant


ionic


 
ionic (with a degree of
covalent character) covalent | covalent covalent
giant simple simple


giant ionic covalent | molecular | molecular


Table 10.10: Some properties, chemical bonding and structure of some Period 3 oxides.


 


 
the giant ionic structure


of magnesium oxide
the giant covalent
structure of


silicon dioxide
the simple molecular
structure of


sulfur dioxide


 


Figure 10.12: The structures of some Period 3 oxides.


 


IMPORTANT
Remember that electronegativity is the power of an atom to attract the electrons in a covalent bond
towards itself. Electronegativity increases across a period and decreases down a group (ignoring the


Group 18 elements).


 
Going across a period, the elements get more electronegative as electrons are more strongly attracted by
the increasing positive nuclear charge (see Section 4.7). The electronegativity values, which indicate the


strength of the attraction of an atom for the electrons in a bond, are shown in Table 10.11.


 


Table 10.11: Electronegativity values for some Period 3 oxides (no data are available for argon).


 


IMPORTANT
As we go across Period 3, the structure of the oxides changes from ionic metal oxides (which are basic


oxides) to giant covalent oxides to simple molecular oxides (which are acidic oxides).


 
The electronegativity of oxygen is 3.5. The greater the difference in electronegativity between the Period 3
element and oxygen, the more likely it is that the oxide will have ionic bonding. Electrons will be
transferred from sodium, magnesium and aluminium atoms (forming positively charged ions) to oxygen
atoms (forming ions) when their oxides are formed. The other Period 3 elements will form covalently


bonded oxides in which bonding electrons are shared.


Notice the high melting points of the giant ionic and giant covalent structures, leading to the use of:


magnesium oxide to line the inside of furnaces
aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide to make ceramics, with giant covalent structures designed to


withstand high temperatures and provide electrical insulation.
The oxides of the metals sodium and magnesium, with purely ionic bonding, produce alkaline solutions with
water as their oxide ions, become hydroxide ions, The oxide ions behave as bases by


accepting H* ions from water molecules:


+
By contrast, the covalently bonded non-metal oxides of phosphorus and sulfur dissolve and react in water
to form acidic solutions. The acid molecules formed donate H* ions to water molecules, behaving as typical


acids. For example, acid:


+ +
The insoluble oxides of aluminium and silicon show their acidic nature by reacting and dissolving in an
alkaline solution, such as hot, concentrated sodium hydroxide solution, forming a soluble salt. This
behaviour is typical of a covalently bonded oxide. However, aluminium oxide also reacts and dissolves in
acidic solutions, forming a soluble salt: behaviour typical of a basic metal oxide with ionic bonding.
Because aluminium oxide behaves in these two ways, this provides evidence that the chemical bonding in


aluminium oxide is not purely ionic nor purely covalent. It is amphoteric.


Question
7 germanium is in Group 14, in Period 4. It is classed as a semimetal or metalloid, as is


silicon in Period 3.


i Predict the chemical bonding and structure of the element germanium.
ii oxide has properties similar to silicon dioxide. It is an acidic oxide. Write a
balanced symbol equation, including state symbols, to show the reaction of


oxide with hot, concentrated sodium hydroxide solution.
What would you expect to happen if oxide was added to 2.0 mol


hydrochloric acid?
b oxide (K,0) is a basic oxide. It reacts and dissolves in water, forming an alkaline

solution.
i Write a balanced symbol equation, including state symbols, to show the reaction of
potassium oxide with water.



ii Write a balanced symbol equation, including state symbols, to show the reaction of


potassium oxide with dilute nitric acid.


iii Predict the chemical bonding and structure of potassium oxide.


10.6 Chlorides of Period 3 elements


Oxidation numbers of the Period 3 chlorides


Table 10.12 shows the formulae of the common chlorides of the Period 3 elements.
The oxidation numbers rise as we cross Period 3, until we reach sulfur in Group 16. This happens because
the Period 3 elements from sodium to phosphorus use all the electrons in their outermost shell, their
valence electrons, in bonding to chlorine (ox. no. = —1). They all exist in positive oxidation states because


chlorine has a higher electronegativity than any of the other Period 3 elements (see Table 10.12).
sodium | magnesium | aluminium | silicon | phosphorus | sulfur | chlorine | argon


(Na) (Mg) (Al) (Si) (P) (S) (Cl) (Ar)


 



Table 10.12: Oxidation numbers of the Period 3 elements in their chlorides. Phosphorus also has a chloride with the

formula PCl3, in which its oxidation number is +3. Sulfur also has a chloride in which its oxidation number is +1.




10.7 Effect of water on chlorides of Period 3


elements
As with the oxides of Period 3 elements, the chlorides also show characteristic behaviour when we add


them to water. Once again, this is linked to their structure and bonding (Table 10.13).
simple simple simple


giant ionic giant ionic molecular molecular molecular molecular
white solids dissolve to form chlorides react with water, giving off white fumes of


colourless solutions hydrogen chloride gas


Table 10.13: The structure and bonding of the chlorides of Period 3 elements and the effect of water on these chlorides.


 


 
At the start of Period 3, the ionic chlorides of sodium (NaCl) and magnesium do not react with
water. The polar water molecules are attracted to the ions, dissolving the chlorides by breaking down the
giant ionic structures. The solutions formed contain the positive metal ions and the negative chloride ions


surrounded by water molecules. The metal ions and the chloride ions are called hydrated ions:


NaCl(s) Na*(aq) +
Aluminium chloride is sometimes represented as AICI3, which suggests that its chemical bonding is likely to
be ionic: with ions and ions in a giant lattice. In solid hydrated aluminium chloride crystals, this is
the case. However, without water it exists as This can be thought of as a dimer (two molecules


joined together) of AICI3. is a covalently bonded molecule (see Figure 10.13).


 


Figure 10.13: The chemical bonding in


 


IMPORTANT
As we go across Period 3, the structures of the chlorides change from ionic metal chlorides (which are
neutral) to metallic chlorides (which can be hydrolysed by water to form acids as one of the products)


to simple molecular chlorides (which form acids when added to water).


 


Once we add water, the dimers are broken down and aluminium ions and chloride ions enter the solution.
Each relatively small and highly charged Al?* ion is hydrated and causes a water molecule bonded to it to


lose an ion. This turns the solution acidic. We can show this in an equation as follows:


> + H*(aq)
The non-metal chlorides and are hydrolysed in water, releasing white fumes of hydrogen chloride


gas in a rapid reaction (Figure 10.14).


+ + 4HCI(g)
The is seen as an off-white precipitate. Some of the hydrogen chloride gas produced dissolves in the


water, leaving an acidic solution (hydrochloric acid).
Phosphorus(V) chloride also undergoes hydrolysis when added to water:


+ > + 5HCI(g)


Both products are soluble in water and are highly acidic.


 


Figure 10.14: Solid phosphorus(V) chloride is hydrolysed in water, releasing white fumes of hydrogen chloride gas.


 


REFLECTION
Work with another learner. On separate pieces of paper, write the name of the Period 3 elements


from Groups 1, 2 and 13-17. Turn these over so you can’t see the names and mix them up.
Each of you chooses one of the pieces of paper and writes down all that you know about the


reaction of that element with water. Include the pH value of the solution formed and an equation.


Compare your answers. Did you do this differently to your partner?


Check how well did you did by comparing your answers with the information in the coursebook.

 


Question
8 Which one of these statements is completely correct?
Aluminium oxide reacts with water to form a solution with a pH of 13-14
Sodium chloride dissolves in water to form a solution of pH 2
pentachloride reacts with water to form a solution of pH 1-2

D
Magnesium reacts with cold water to form a solution with a pH of 13-14.



10.8 Deducing the position of an element in the


Periodic Table
We can deduce the possible position of an element in the Periodic Table by looking at its physical and
chemical properties. We can also predict, as Mendeleev did, the physical and chemical properties of an
element in a given group if we know its position. In the worked examples given, note there are several


ways of arriving at the same conclusion.


WORKED EXAMPLES
G forms a chloride, which reacts with water to form a solution of pH 1. It forms an oxide
which has a melting point of 1610 °C. The oxide does not dissolve in or react with aqueous sodium


hydroxide. Deduce the possible position of G in the Periodic Table.


Solution


Step 1: Use the pH data to decide whether G is likely to be a metal or non-metal.
Low pH suggests that it is a metal chloride which undergoes hydrolysis, so is likely to be


in Group 13 to 17.


Step 2: Use the solubility data.
The oxide doesn’t dissolve in sodium hydroxide. This rules out aluminium oxide because
this reacts with sodium hydroxide. So G could be a giant covalent structure or simple


molecular structure.
Step 3: Use melting point data.


The melting point is high so it is likely to be a giant covalent structure in Group 14.


Step 4: It cannot be in Period 2 because is a gas. So it could be in Period 3 or lower.
is in Group 16 and Period 4 of the Periodic Table. Predict some physical and chemical


properties of selenium.
Step 1: Identify the likely structure of selenium from its position in the Periodic Table and


comparison with other Group 16 elements.
It’s a non-metal in Group 16 so comparing with sulfur it should have a simple molecular


structure.


Step 2: Identify the physical properties related to the structure.
Simple molecular structures have (relatively) low melting points, do not conduct


electricity and are insoluble in water.
Step 3: Identify the chemical properties related to reaction with water, reaction with chlorine

and reaction with oxygen.

Simple molecules do not react with water.
Reacts with chlorine to form simple molecule (which reacts with water vapour in


the air to produce hydrogen chloride).
Reacts with oxygen to form an oxide of possible formula (by comparison with


sulfur).


 


Question
Thechloride of an unknown element, X, is a liquid at 20 °C. This chloride reacts with water, giving


off white fumes and leaving an acidic solution.
i Does element X belong to Group 1, Group 2 or Group 15 of the Periodic Table?
ii What type of reaction takes place between X and water?

Identify the white fumes given off when X reacts with water.
The chloride of an unknown element Y is a solid at 20 °C. This chloride does not react with water
but dissolves to give a neutral solution. Does element Y belong to Group 1, Group 14 or Group 16
of the Periodic Table?


SUMMARY
As you go across a period in the Periodic Table, there are variations in physical properties such as ionisation


energies, atomic radii, ionic radii, melting points and electrical conductivities.


Atomic radii decrease across a period due to increasing nuclear charge.
Across the period, the structures of the elements change from giant metallic, through giant molecular to simple


molecular. Group 18 elements consist of individual atoms.
Across the period, the oxides of Period 3 elements change from basic compounds with ionic bonding through to
giant molecular in the centre of the period (Group 14) with silicon, going on to acidic covalently bonded simple
molecules of the non-metal oxides. Aluminium oxide (in Group 13) is amphoteric, exhibiting both basic and acidic


behaviour.
Across the period, the chlorides of Period 3 elements change from ionic compounds that dissolve in water to
covalent compounds that are hydrolysed by water, releasing fumes of hydrogen chloride and leaving an acidic


solution.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


Explain what is meant by the term ‘periodic property’. [2]
graph shows how a periodic property varies when plotted against atomic number for


Period 3 (sodium to argon).


 

 

A

>

t



a




0 - -
11 18

Atomic number


[1]
the property.


[4]


ii Explain the overall trend across the period.
[Total: 7]


variation of melting point with atomic number for Periods 2 and 3 is shown in the


 


 
graph below.
4500
4000
> 3500
= 3000
2 2500
2 2000
@ 1500
= 1000
500
1
0 5 10 15 20
Atomic number
[1]
what we mean when we say melting point is a periodic property.
Explain the following.
4
melting point of silicon is much greater than that of phosphorus.
5
ii The melting point of aluminium is greater than that of sodium.
[Total: 10]
[1]
3 Describe how the atomic radius varies across Periods 2 and 3.
[4]
ii Explain this trend.
1
b Describe how the atomic radius varies down each group of the Periodic Table.


[1]


ii Explain this trend.
[Total: 7]


4 Describe the acid-base nature of the solutions obtained when the following
compounds are added to water.

Use equations to illustrate your answers.
[2]
chloride


 


SELF-EVALUATION
describe and explain the periodicity in the variation of atomic
radius, ionic radius, melting point and electrical conductivity of


the elements
describe and write equations for the reactions of the elements


with oxygen to give MgO, and SOz
describe and write equations for the reactions of the elements


with chlorine to give NaCl, AICI3, and PCls
describe and write equations for the reactions of Na and Mg


with water


w
describe and explain the variation in the oxidation number of
the oxides Na20, MgO, P4019, SO2 and SO3 and the
chlorides NaCl, SiClq and PCls in terms of their


outer shell electrons
describe and write equations for the reactions, if any, of
MgO, SO2 and SO3 with water, including


the likely pH of the solutions obtained
describe, explain and write equations for the acid / base
behaviour of MgO, SO3, NaOH,


and


describe the amphoteric behaviour of and Al(OH)3
describe and write equations for the reactions, if any, of NaCl,
AICI3, and with water, including the likely pH


of the solutions obtained
explain the variations in the trends in reactivity of the oxides


and chlorides above in terms of bonding and electronegativity
deduce the types of bonding present in oxides and chlorides of


Period 3 from their chemical and physical properties
predict the characteristic properties of an element in a given


group using knowledge of periodicity
deduce the nature, position in the Periodic Table and identity


of unknown elements from given information.
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on



w




 



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


BEFORE YOU START


Working in your group, answer these questions:

Which one of the following electronic configurations correctly describes an atom of calcium?

2s? 2p® 3s?
1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p3 3d3


2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®


1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3d8


>
2 Magnesium powder reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid, giving off hydrogen and leaving a solution


of magnesium chloride.


Write a balanced equation, including state symbols for this reaction.
3 Write down the trend in the reactivity of the Group 1 elements, with increasing atomic number


(going down the group).
The first ionisation energy of beryllium is 900 kj


Write down exactly what this statement means in a single sentence.
Swap your answer with another student. Then discuss each other’s answers and revise your


sentence if necessary.
5 Working as a pair, one person explains to the other how a magnesium ion is formed from a
magnesium atom. Then the other person explains the formation of an oxide ion. Finally discuss


together how the ions form ionic bonds in the compound, magnesium oxide.


 


SOME USES OF GROUP 2 COMPOUNDS
Elements from Group 2 are used in a range of applications. For example, Group 2 metals produce
coloured flames when heated, leading to their use in flares and fireworks. Magnesium in its powdered
form is used in flares. The large surface area in a fine powder increases the rate of reaction with


oxygen.
In military aircraft, the heat given off from decoy magnesium flares confuses the Infrared detection

systems in heat-seeking missiles (Figure 11.1). The missiles cannot focus in and target the aircraft.
The compounds of Group 2 elements are used even more widely than the elements themselves. Most
useful is calcium carbonate, CaCO3. It is found in the many types of limestone, which provide useful
rocks for building. The limestone rock itself can be shaped into blocks that builders can bind to each
other using mortar. Marble is another form of calcium carbonate used as a building material, for
example to make expensive tiles.


 


Figure 11.1: A military plane releasing its decoy flares to protect itself from missile attack.


 
However, most calcium carbonate is used to make cement. The first stage in the manufacture of


cement is the roasting of limestone in a lime kiln (see Figure 11.2).


 
Figure 11.2: In a rotating lime kiln, calcium carbonate undergoes thermal decomposition to form calcium oxide and


carbon dioxide.


 
At the high temperatures in the kiln, calcium carbonate decomposes to form calcium oxide (also called

lime or quicklime):


+
lime
The calcium oxide made in the lime kiln is roasted with clay to make cement. Cement can be mixed
with sand and small pieces of rock to make concrete, the most widely used building material in the


world. Builders improve its strength by including iron rods, which run through the concrete.
Farmers use slaked lime (calcium hydroxide, to raise the pH of acidic soil. Calcium hydroxide


is basic, so it will react with and neutralise acid, raising the pH of the soil.


Questions for discussion
rock is mined from huge quarries before being taken to lime kilns to be roasted. Ina
small group, discuss some environmental impacts of using the world’s most common building


material, concrete.
When lightning strikes during a thunderstorm, the rain that falls is a dilute solution of nitric acid
(HNO3). Work with a partner to write a balanced chemical equation, including state symbols, to


show how slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) added to soil can neutralise nitric acid.
Justify which is the more important use of a Group 2 compound: making concrete or raising the pH

of soil.



11.1 Physical properties of Group 2 elements
We sometimes refer to the elements in Group 2 of the Periodic Table as the alkaline earth metals. As the
elements are in Group 2, they have atoms whose electronic configurations end with two electrons in their


outermost principal quantum shell. These two outer electrons occupy an s sub-shell.

Here are the electronic configurations of the first five elements in Group 2:

Beryllium (Be) 1s? 2s?

Magnesium (Mg) 1s? 2s2 2p® 3s2

Calcium (Ca) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p®


Strontium (Sr) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s? 4p® 5s?


Barium (Ba) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s? 4p® 5s? 5p® 6s?
One way of describing the size of an atom is its metallic radius. The metallic radius is half the distance


between the nuclei in a giant metallic lattice (Figure 11.3). See Section 10.2 for other measures that


describe the size of atoms.


Figure 11.3: The metallic radius gives us a measure of the size of the atoms of metallic elements.


 


Look at the metallic radii of the Group 2 elements measured in nanometres, shown in Table 11.1.


beryllium (Be)
magnesium (Mg)
calcium (Ca)


strontium (Sr)


barium (Ba)


 


Table 11.1: The metallic radii of the Group 2 elements. (1 nm = 1 x 1072 m).


 
Can you see the trend? The atoms of Group 2 elements get larger going down the group. This is because the


outer two electrons occupy a new principal quantum shell that is further away from the nucleus.
There are also general trends in other physical properties, such as melting point and density, shown in Table


11.2 and displayed in Figures 11.4 and 11.5.


 


magnesium (Mg)


 


Table 11.2: The melting points and densities of the Group 2 elements.


 




D
=

=
500
0 4 12 20 38 56


Be Mg Ca Sr Ba


Atomic number


Figure 11.4: Melting points of the Group 2 elements.


 


4
Density /


= w



04 12 20 38 56


Be Mg Ca Sr Ba


Atomic number


Figure 11.5: Densities of the Group 2 elements.


 

Question
Look at Figure 11.4.


Give the general trend in the melting points going down Group 2.


Which element breaks the trend?
b why the atoms in Group 2, as in any other group, get larger with increasing atomic


number.
c i State the charge you would expect the ions of Group 2 elements to carry.


whether their ions will be larger or smaller than their atoms.
your answers to parts i and ii with another student’s answers. Then discuss and


explain your ideas together.
(Ra) is a radioactive element found below barium at the bottom of Group 2. Working with a


partner, apply your knowledge of trends in Group 2 to discuss and predict:
i its melting point


density


metallic radius.


REFLECTION


Do you enjoy spotting trends in data or do you find expressing trends difficult? How about applying your
knowledge of the trends within a group to make predictions about the properties of a particular
element? Are there any aspects of these skills that you find difficult? If so, discuss these with another


student, then seek advice if you are still unsure.


 


11.2 Reactions of Group 2 elements
The Group 2 metals form ionic compounds. When they react, their atoms lose the two electrons from their
outermost s sub-shell and form an ion with the stable electronic configuration of a noble gas. This creates a


2+ ion. For example, in the ionisation of a magnesium atom to a magnesium ion:
Mg — +
oxidation number 0 +2


The metals act as reducing agents. Their atoms donate (give away) electrons and so they are oxidised
themselves as they react to form their 2+ ions. The ionisation energies shown in Table 11.3 show how


easily the two outer electrons are removed from the Group 2 atoms.


Table 11.3: The first and second ionisation energies of the Group 2 elements.


 

 

The metals in Group 2 get more reactive as we go down the group. As you can see from Table 11.3, it takes

less energy (i.e. it gets easier) to remove the pair of outer electrons going down Group 2. So, although the

positive charge on the nucleus increases down the group:


the greater shielding effect provided by extra inner shells of electrons, and
e the larger distance of the outermost electrons from the nucleus outweigh the attraction of the higher


nuclear charge.
This helps to explain the increase in reactivity going down the group, as it gets easier for the atoms to form


their 2+ ions.


IMPORTANT


 


The Group 2 elements get more reactive going down the group.
This trend is shown by looking at reactions of the Group 2 metals, magnesium to barium, with dilute
hydrochloric acid. The metals react with dilute hydrochloric acid, forming a solution of the metal chloride


and giving off hydrogen gas.
For example:
Mg(s) + > +


Ca(s) + + H2(g)
The reactions get more vigorous descending the group. You can see this by the increasing rate at which


bubbles of hydrogen gas are given off.
Magnesium reacts in a similar way with dilute sulfuric acid:


Mg(s) + > MgSO,(aq) + H2(g)
However, any reaction with calcium, strontium or barium is quickly stopped by the formation of an
insoluble sulfate layer on the surface of the metals. For example, you can see a slow stream of hydrogen


bubbles for a short time when a pellet (small piece) of calcium metal is dropped into dilute sulfuric acid:

Ca(s) + > + H2(g)
The calcium gets then gets completely covered by a layer sparingly soluble calcium sulfate and the


bubbles of hydrogen stop rising from the metal.
Strontium sulfate and barium sulfate are even less soluble than calcium sulfate so will quickly stop any


reaction with the metals strontium and barium.


The Group 2 sulfates get less soluble going down the group.
Question
2 a i Which one of the following electronic configurations correctly describes a calcium ion?
A
B 352

D 2s? 2p® 3p®


Write a half equation to show the conversion of a calcium atom into a calcium ion.
does the oxidation number of calcium change in part ii? Explain whether the calcium


has been oxidised or reduced in this change.
up the first two ionisation energies of the Group 2 elements shown in Table 11.3, and record


your results in a table.
c Draw a sketch graph to show the ‘sum of the first two ionisation energies’ against atomic number


for the Group 2 elements beryllium to barium.
the trend shown on your graph and how this might affect the reactivity of the Group 2


elements.


11.3 Reactions with oxygen
The Group 2 metals burn in air, and burn more rapidly in oxygen gas. The metals form white solid oxides.
For example, magnesium ribbon burns with a bright white flame once it is ignited in a Bunsen flame (Figure


11.6):
+ O2(g) 2MgO(s)


The magnesium oxide formed is basic in character, as shown in Section 10.5.
The Group 2 metals get more reactive with oxygen going down the group. The larger atoms lose their outer
two electrons more readily than the smaller atoms in the group. The reasons for this are given below Table





Figure 11.6: Magnesium ribbon reacting with oxygen in the air.


 


Barium metal is so highly reactive that it must be stored under oil to keep it out of contact with air.
Some of the Group 2 metals burn with characteristic flame colours. In the heat of the Bunsen burner flame,
the metal atoms are oxidised, losing two electrons, and forming their positive ions. The oxidation number
of the metal atoms (0) increases to the +2 state in the process. It is the 2+ ions formed in the reaction that


cause the characteristic colours you can see in the Bunsen burner flame.

Flame tests
We can test for calcium, strontium and barium ions in compounds using flame tests (Figure 11.7). A
nichrome wire, cleaned with concentrated hydrochloric acid, is dipped into a sample of the salt to be tested

and heated in a non-luminous Bunsen flame:

calcium compounds give a brick-red colour


strontium compounds give a scarlet/red colour

barium compounds give an apple-green colour.



 


Figure 11.7: The flame colours of calcium, strontium and barium.


 


Reactions of oxides with dilute acid
The basic oxides of the Group 2 metals can be neutralised by dilute acid. The general equation for the


reaction of a basic oxide is:
basic oxide + dilute acid a salt + water
For example:


MgO(s) + +
The white magnesium oxide powder dissolves, forming a colourless solution of magnesium chloride, as it
reacts with the dilute acid. The oxides of calcium (CaO), strontium (SrO) and barium (BaO) are also


neutralised by dilute hydrochloric acid.
A similar reaction occurs when excess dilute sulfuric acid is added to the Group 2 oxides, but a sulfate


solution is formed:


MgO(s) + MgSO,(aq) +
With dilute sulfuric acid, the decreasing solubility of the sulfate formed going down the group will also
affect the neutralisation reaction with dilute sulfuric acid. The insoluble sulfates will form at the surface of
the oxides, protecting any solid oxide beneath. However, when the oxide is in the form of a powder and


stirred, significant neutralisation can occur.


11.4 Reactions with water
We have seen in Section 10.3 how magnesium reacts very slowly with cold water (Figure 11.8). However, if
left long enough, the reaction will eventually form a weakly alkaline solution, and give off enough hydrogen


to test:


Mg(s) + > Mg(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)


hydrogen collected slowly


  


inverted filter funnel
water


magnesium ribbon


(cleaned with sandpaper)


Figure 11.8: Cleaned with sandpaper, magnesium ribbon reacts very, very slowly with water at room temperature.


 
Hot magnesium does react vigorously with water in the form of steam. The magnesium and steam produce


magnesium oxide (a white solid) and hydrogen gas (see Figure 11.9):
Mg(s) + > MgO(s) +
Calcium reacts more readily than magnesium with water at room temperature:


Ca(s) + Ca(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)
This reaction gives off a steady stream of hydrogen gas and forms a cloudy white suspension of slightly
soluble calcium hydroxide. The calcium hydroxide that does dissolve forms a solution that we call

‘limewater’, which makes the solution weakly alkaline.
Going down the group, hydrogen gas is released more and more rapidly by the reaction of the Group 2
metal with water (see Figure 11.10).


 
Figure 11.9: An experiment showing magnesium reacting with steam. The steam is given off from mineral wool soaked in
water at the right-hand end of the test-tube. The white magnesium oxide formed is visible inside the test-tube. The


hydrogen gas produced in the reaction has been ignited at the end of the straight tube.


 


 


 
Magnesium oxide is soluble in water, and forms a weakly alkaline solution of magnesium


hydroxide. A saturated solution of magnesium hydroxide will have a pH value of about 10:


MgO(s) + Mg(OH)2(aq)
Calcium oxide, CaO, reacts with water to form calcium hydroxide. When water is dripped onto the surface
of a lump of calcium oxide it causes a vigorous reaction. It releases so much energy that some of the water


boils off as the solid lump appears to expand, and cracks open:


CaO(s) +
In excess water, some of the slightly soluble calcium hydroxide dissolves to form a weakly alkaline solution,
with a slightly higher pH than magnesium hydroxide. The higher concentration of aqueous hydroxide ions

in a saturated solution of calcium hydroxide solution result in its pH of about 11:
Ca(OH)2(s) +



In general, the reaction and dissolving of the Group 2 metal oxides in water is described by the following


ionic equation:


+


IMPORTANT
The solutions formed from the reactions of the Group 2 metal oxides with water get more alkaline


going down the group.


 
We can explain this increase in alkalinity by looking at the solubility of the Group 2 hydroxides formed (see


Table 11.4).
magnesium hydroxide,
calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2


strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH)2


barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2


 


Table 11.4: Solubility of the Group 2 hydroxides in water.


 


IMPORTANT


The solubility of the Group 2 hydroxides increases going down Group 2.


 
Therefore, when adding and stirring magnesium hydroxide in water to make a saturated solution, then
doing the same with barium hydroxide, there will be a higher concentration of hydroxide ions in the
saturated barium hydroxide solution. This higher concentration of hydroxide ions results in a higher pH


value for the barium hydroxide solution.

Reactions of hydroxides with dilute acid
The alkaline hydroxides of the Group 2 metals will all be neutralised by dilute acid:

hydroxide + dilute acid > a salt + water
For example, with magnesium hydroxide powder and dilute hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid:
+ +


+ - +
or with barium hydroxide solution:
Ba(OH)2(aq) + > +


+ > BaSO,(s) +

The barium sulfate forms as a white precipitate, unlike the soluble barium chloride (a colourless solution).


Question
3 Write balanced chemical equations, including state symbols, for the reaction of:
i strontium with oxygen


ii oxide with water.


b i Write a balanced chemical equation, including state symbols, for the reaction of barium with
water.
the pH of the solution formed in part b i.
(Ra) is a radioactive element found below barium at the bottom of Group 2.
Applying your knowledge of Group 2, discuss and predict with a partner:
i the formula of the ion formed by radium
ii formulae of its oxide and hydroxide
first ionisation energy


its reactivity compared with barium
relative pH of its saturated hydroxide solution compared with a saturated solution of


calcium hydroxide
solubility of its sulfate compared with strontium sulfate


the equation for the reaction of its solid oxide with dilute hydrochloric acid
what you would expect to see if you mixed radium hydroxide solution with dilute sulfuric


acid.
Table 11.4 and the relative atomic mass data (from the Periodic Table at the back of this
book), calculate the mass of calcium hydroxide that will dissolve in 50 g of water at 298 K. Write
down each step in your working out. Then join another student to explain your answers to each


other and discuss who has the better answer.


REFLECTION
At this point, look back at the Learning Intentions listed at the start of this chapter. Check which


ones you have covered first of all.


Then make a list of those outcomes you feel uncertain about.
Discuss your list with another student and talk about any issues you can sort out together. Make a


list of specific questions for your teacher to help you with any unresolved problems you may have.


 


Reactions of Group 2 carbonates
The Group 2 carbonates have the general formula XCO3. The carbonates of magnesium, calcium, strontium


and barium are all insoluble in water.
However, the carbonates all react in dilute acid, forming a salt and water and giving off carbon dioxide gas.


For example, with dilute sulfuric acid:


MgCO3(s) + + +
The magnesium sulfate salt formed in the reaction above is soluble in water. This remains in aqueous


solution, and no solid carbonate will remain in excess dilute sulfuric acid.
However, the sulfates of the other Group 2 elements are much less soluble than magnesium sulfate.
Remember the decreasing trend in the solubility of the sulfates described in Section 11.2. So the sulfates of
calcium, strontium and barium tend to form as an insoluble sulfate layer on their solid carbonates. This


stops any further reaction after the initial effervescence (bubbling) of carbon dioxide gas is seen.
For example:


BaCO3(s) + BaSO,(s) + + CO2(g)
The reactions of the Group 2 carbonates with dilute hydrochloric acid will all form soluble chloride salts,


water and carbon dioxide gas.

For example:
BaCO3(s) + + +


Thermal decomposition of Group 2 carbonates and nitrates
The carbonates and nitrates of the Group 2 elements decompose when heated. The carbonates break


down to form the metal oxide and give off carbon dioxide gas. For example:


MgCO3(s) MgO(s) +
The temperature at which thermal decomposition of the Group 2 carbonates takes place increases going


down Group 2.
The Group 2 nitrates also undergo decomposition.
For example:


2Ca(NO3)>(s) 2CaO(s) + +
A brown gas is observed when a Group 2 nitrate is heated. This is toxic nitrogen dioxide, (nitrogen(IV)


oxide).


IMPORTANT
As with the carbonates, a higher temperature is needed to thermally decompose the nitrates as Group


2 is descended.


 
You can read an explanation of the trend in the thermal stability of the Group 2 carbonates and nitrates in


Section 19.3.
Questions
4 a i Write the chemical formula of magnesium carbonate.
Discuss with a partner why the formula of magnesium carbonate is not
b a balanced symbol equation for the reaction of barium carbonate with dilute nitric acid.
one of the three compounds listed will decompose at the lowest temperature?
i carbonate
B carbonate


barium carbonate


barium nitrate



calcium nitrate
nitrate
balanced chemical equations, including state symbols, for the thermal decomposition of:


i strontium carbonate


ii barium nitrate.


 


Reflect on which parts of this chapter you found easiest to understand.


Work with another learner to discuss these points:


Write word and symbol equations for the reactions of either magnesium, calcium, strontium or
barium with:



ii water


dilute hydrochloric acid.
b Now try the equations for the oxide, hydroxides and carbonates of a Group 2 element of your


choice with water and with dilute sulfuric acid.
c Make a list of the key words in this chapter so far and explain their meaning to another


learner.
Work with another learner to discuss ways of remembering the trends descending Group 2 in a to
d below. This could even be an illustration, based on stairs or ladders, or a role-play, acting out the

rising and falling trends.

the reactivity of the Group 2 elements

solubility of their hydroxides


the solubility of their sulfates


the thermal stability of their carbonates and nitrates.
Think back to the start of your work on the Group 2 elements and their compounds. Discuss the


skills you needed to use, including practical skills, with a partner.

4 Which skills did you enjoy practising most?



SUMMARY
Going down Group 2 from magnesium to barium, the atomic radius increases. This is due to the addition of an extra


principal quantum shell of electrons for the atoms of each element as the group is descended.
The Group 2 elements, magnesium to barium, react with water to produce hydrogen gas and the metal hydroxide,


which may be only slightly soluble.
The Group 2 elements, magnesium to barium, burn in air to form white solid oxides. These oxides form hydroxides
with water. The hydroxides get more soluble in water going down the group so their solutions can become more


alkaline.


The sulfates of Group 2 elements get less soluble in water going down the group.
Reactivity of the elements with oxygen or water increases going down Group 2, as the first and second ionisation


energies decrease. Therefore it becomes easier to remove electrons from the atoms descending Group 2.


The Group 2 carbonates and nitrates get more resistant to thermal decomposition descending the group.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
You will need a copy of the Periodic Table (see Appendix 1) to answer some of these questions.
row of the table is correct, A, B, C or D? [1]


Trend in reactivity of Trend in solubility of
elements going down Group Trend in solubility of hydroxides going down Group


sulfates going down Group 2 | 2
2
increases decreases increases


decreases decreases increases
increases increases decreases


decreases increases decreases


and radium are both in Group 2.


 
[2]


[4]
the electronic configuration of beryllium.


Give the equations for the reactions of beryllium and radium with oxygen.
dot-and-cross diagrams, and showing the outer electrons only, draw the electronic [5]


configurations of beryllium and oxygen before and after bonding.


[3]
4


e Using your diagram, explain why beryllium has a higher melting point than


Draw a diagram to show the metallic bonding in both beryllium and radium.


3 is a solution of calcium hydroxide.
Give the formula of calcium hydroxide.
2
ii Explain why calcium hydroxide is used in agriculture.
Exactly 0.1 moles of each of calcium hydroxide and barium hydroxide are added to
separate beakers containing 100 cm? of water and stirred to form saturated solutions.


Explain which solution has the higher pH value.
4 the following reactions, state which elements are oxidised and which are reduced, and give the


changes in oxidation number.
a [3]
[3]
b 2H,0 +

[3]
2Mg + + C [Total: 9]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to

sectio more work there move on
describe, and write equations for, the reactions of the Group 2 | 11.2,
elements with oxygen, water and dilute acids 11.3, 11.4


describe, and write equations for, the reactions of the Group 2
oxides, hydroxides and carbonates with water and with dilute 11.3; 11.4

acids
describe, and write equations for, the thermal decomposition 11.4
of the Group 2 nitrates and carbonates
describe, and make predictions from, the trends in properties
of the Group 2 elements and their compounds that are
covered in this chapter


state the variation in the solubilities of the Group 2 hydroxides



and sulfates.


 


 


 


images


 


 


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS





BEFORE YOU START

Working in a small group:


Write down the electronic configuration of a bromine atom.
The oxidation number of chlorine can vary. Give its oxidation number in the following compounds:
Nacl
b Naclo


Explain which element is oxidised and which is reduced in this reaction:


2Fe(s) + 2FeCl3(s)
Draw a dot-and-cross diagram to show the covalent bonding in a chlorine molecule, Only


include outer shell electrons.
Discuss with a partner what we mean by ‘bond energy’. Compare your answer with another


pair of learners and write an agreed definition of the term bond energy.


State the unit that bond energies are expressed in.


USES OF THE HALOGENS AND THEIR COMPOUNDS


 
People have not always used the halogens and their compounds to benefit society. For example,
chlorine was used as the first chemical weapon in the First World War (1914-18). Its compounds can


also be used in biological nerve gases, though this use is banned by international agreement.
However, scientists can use chlorine to kill bacteria in drinking water (Figure 12.1). This saves millions
of lives around the world. It has greatly reduced the number of cases of cholera, but about 25 000


people still die world-wide every day from diseases spread in water.
Many pesticides containing halogen atoms have reduced deaths caused by disease-carrying insects.
Malaria is the main disease. These pesticides also reduce the loss of crops in storage. However, these


halogen compounds can have bad effects on other wildlife in the food chain.
Halogen compounds have also damaged the Earth’s ozone layer. This thin layer of gas in the upper
atmosphere absorbs harmful ultra-violet rays from the Sun. The halogen compounds called CFCs
(chlorofluorocarbons) are very unreactive and people once thought they were completely harmless to


living things. So CFCs were used in aerosols and as coolants in fridges.


 


Figure 12.1: Chlorine may be added to drinking water to kill harmful microorganisms.


 
Then, scientists in the 1980s discovered a hole in our protective ozone layer caused by CFCs reacting
with ozone: and the hole was growing. This meant that people would have a greater risk of getting skin
cancer and eye cataracts. Because of this, CFCs are now banned, as are other halogen compounds
that were used in fire extinguishers, flame-proofing and solvents. Scientists are now using new
compounds instead of CFCs. There is evidence that the hole in the ozone layer is gradually getting


smaller. You can find out more detail on the environmental effect of CFCs at the start of Chapter 16.
Question for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
Do you believe that the uses of halogens and their compounds have had a positive or negative

effect on the world, overall?



12.1 Physical properties of Group 17 elements
In this chapter we are looking at the elements in Group 17 of the Periodic Table. These are called the


halogens. Their atoms all have seven electrons in the outer principal quantum shell.

Here are the electronic configurations of the first four elements in Group 17:

fluorine (F) 1s? 2s? 2p>

chlorine (Cl) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s2


bromine (Br) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 4s?


iodine 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s? 4p® 5s?
The Group 17 elements are all non-metals. At room temperature, they exist as diatomic molecules, i.e.
molecules made up of two atoms, and There is a single covalent bond between the two


atoms in each molecule. You can see the elements chlorine, bromine and iodine in Figure 12.2.


Chlorine


  
Figure 12.2: Three of the Group 17 elements, known as the halogens. Notice that the colour of the elements gets darker


going down the group.


 


Table 12.1 shows some of the physical properties of the halogens.
iodine (Iz) 0.133 114 184 grey / black solid, purple


vapour


 
Table 12.1: Some physical properties of the Group 17 elements. The atomic radius value is taken from single


covalent data (see Section 4.3).


 
Looking at Table 12.1, you can see that the melting points and boiling points of the halogens increase going
down the group. The boiling point data gives us an idea of the volatility of the halogens, i.e. the ease with
which they evaporate. All the values are relatively low because they have simple molecular structures.
There are only weak van der Waals’ forces between their diatomic molecules, caused by instantaneous
dipole-induced dipole forces. These forces increase as the number of electrons in the molecules increases
with increasing atomic number. The greater the number of electrons, the greater the opportunities for
instantaneous dipoles arising within molecules, and for induced dipoles to be produced on neighbouring
molecules. The larger the molecules, the stronger the van der Waals’ forces between molecules. This


makes iodine the least volatile and fluorine the most volatile of the halogens you are learning about.


You can also see that the colours of the halogens get darker going down the group.
Question
Describe the trend in volatility you see going down Group 17.
b Table 12.1, deduce the state of each halogen at 20 °C.


What is the trend in the atomic radii of the halogens? Explain this trend.
(At) lies below iodine at the bottom of Group 17. Discuss with a partner, and then predict


astatine’s:
i state at 20 °C

colour
radius.


12.2 Reactions of Group 17 elements
The halogen atoms need to gain just one more electron to achieve the stable electronic configuration of
the noble gas atoms to the right of them in the Periodic Table. Therefore, halogens react with metallic
elements, with each of their atoms gaining one electron from atoms of the metal, to become ions with a 1—


charge.
For example:


Ca(s) + >
When a halogen reacts with a metal atom, the halogen atom gains one electron. Because of this, the
halogen elements are oxidising agents (electron acceptors). In the process of oxidising another substance,
the elements themselves are reduced. Their oxidation number is reduced from 0 in the element to —1 in


the compound formed.
Cl, > + 2e


oxidation number 0 -1
The halogens also react with many non-metals. Each halogen atom shares a pair of electrons with the other


non-metal atom in a covalent bond, e.g. in hydrogen chloride,


H2(g) + > 2HCI(g)
We can repeat the reactions of chlorine with calcium and with hydrogen (shown here) with the other
halogens. In these experiments we find that the reactions of fluorine are more vigorous than those of


chlorine. Bromine reacts less vigorously than chlorine, and iodine is less reactive than bromine.


IMPORTANT


The halogens get less reactive going down Group 17.
Electronegativity is the ability of a covalently bonded atom to attract the bonding pair of electrons towards
itself (see Section 4.7). This pattern in reactivity corresponds to the trend in electronegativity going down


the group, shown in Table 12.2.


 
A fluorine atom has the strongest pull on the pair of electrons in a covalent bond, while an iodine atom has
the weakest attraction for electrons. We can explain this by looking at the atomic radii data in Table 12.1.
The fluorine atom is the smallest in the group. Its outer shell is nearer to the attractive force of the nucleus
and an electron entering its outer shell will also experience the least shielding from the attraction of the


positive nuclear charge.


fluorine (F)


bromine (Br)


iodine


 


Table 12.2: Electronegativity values of the halogens.


 
These factors outweigh the fact that fluorine’s nuclear charge is only 9+ compared with iodine’s 53+.


Therefore, fluorine is a much stronger oxidising agent (acceptor of electrons) than iodine.
Question


2 Inasmall group, discuss in detail why chlorine is more reactive than bromine.


and produce a poster to illustrate your answer to part a to the rest of the class.


Evidence for the oxidising power of the halogens
We can also judge the relative reactivity (or the oxidising power) of the halogens by looking at their


displacement reactions with other halide ions in solution.


IMPORTANT
A more reactive halogen can displace a less reactive halogen from a halide solution of the less reactive


halogen.


 


Let’s look at an example. When chlorine water, is added to a solution of sodium bromide containing
ions, the solution changes to a yellowish-brown colour. The colour is caused by the presence of
dissolved bromine molecules, as found in bromine water. The displacement reaction that takes

place is:

+ 2NaBr(aq) +


We say that chlorine has displaced bromine from solution.
This is summarised in the ionic equation for this displacement reaction:


+ > +
The chlorine atoms are more electronegative than bromine atoms so are more likely (have a stronger


tendency) to form negatively charged ions.
Likewise, bromine will displace iodine from an iodide solution:
+ 2Nal(aq) 2NaBr(aq) +


or as an ionic equation:


+ > +


IMPORTANT
These displacement reactions show that the oxidising power of the halogens (their ability to gain


electrons) decreases going down Group 17.


 
The colours of the halogen molecules in solution are difficult to identify positively in these displacement
experiments. However, the halogens (Clz, and Iz) dissolve well in the colourless liquid, cyclohexane
(which is immiscible in water, forming two separate layers). The halogens dissolved in cyclohexane are

clearly different colours.
Therefore, you can add some of this organic solvent after mixing the halogen / halide solutions, shaking the
mixture. Then allow the reaction mixture to settle into two layers, showing clearly which halogen is present
as its diatomic molecules (see Figure 12.3).


 
Figure 12.3: Cyclohexane forms a layer on top of water. Dissolved chlorine is very pale green in this upper organic layer,


bromine is orange and iodine is purple.


 


Question
Chlorine water is mixed with a solution of potassium iodide in a test-tube, 2 cm? of cyclohexane is


added to the test-tube, which is stoppered and shaken, then allowed to stand.
a balanced symbol equation, including state symbols, for the reaction that occurs.


b an ionic equation for this reaction.


What colour is the cyclohexane layer at the end of the experiment?


REFLECTION
Reflect on your work looking at the displacement reactions of the halogens and their halide


solutions.
Discuss with a partner to decide how confident you are at constructing ionic equations, as in part


b in Question 3 above.


Can you draw conclusions from your observations of the experiments?
Now reflect on what you have discussed above and write a series of steps for constructing ionic


equations.


 


Reactions of halogens with hydrogen


The halogens form hydrogen halides when combined with hydrogen gas.
One example of this is the reaction of hydrogen with chlorine to give hydrogen chloride gas. The trend in


reactivity is illustrated by their reactions in Table 12.3.


 


H2(g) + F2(g) 2HF(g) reacts explosively even in cool, dark conditions


+ reacts explosively in sunlight


H2(g) + Br2(g) > 2HBr(g) reacts slowly on heating


 


+ = 2HI(g) forms an equilibrium mixture on heating


Table 12.3: The reactions of hydrogen and the halogens, showing decreasing reactivity going down Group 17.


 
The hydrogen halides formed differ in their thermal stability. Hydrogen iodide can be decomposed by


inserting a red-hot wire into a sample of hydrogen iodide gas. The purple fumes seen are iodine vapour:
2HI(g) H2(g) +


By contrast, hydrogen fluoride and hydrogen chloride are not decomposed in temperatures up to 1500 °C.
Hydrogen bromide is not as stable as HF and HCI, but it is more resistant to decomposition than hydrogen
iodide. At 430 °C in a closed container, 10% of a sample of HBr will decompose, whereas around 20% of HI


decomposes at that temperature.


IMPORTANT

The hydrogen halides get less thermally stable going down Group 17.
thermally stable HF



i Her


thermally stable HI


 


We can explain this trend by looking at the bond strengths as shown by bond energies in Table 12.4.


 


Table 12.4: Hydrogen-halogen bond energies.


 
As you can see in Table 12.4, the bond energies decrease going down Group 17, making it easier to break
the hydrogen-halogen bond. This is because the iodine atom is the largest atom. The overlap of its outer
shell with a hydrogen atom gives a much longer bond length than with the other smaller halogen atoms.
The longer the bond, the weaker it is, and the less energy required to break it. For this reason, HI is less


thermally stable than HF.
Question
4 Astatine (At) lies below iodine at the bottom of Group 17.
Discuss and predict:
i the equation for its reaction with hydrogen
ii vigour of its reaction with hydrogen
the thermal stability of its hydride.

Explain why chlorine is a more powerful oxidising agent than bromine.
with a partner, design a picture with labels to illustrate your answer to part b. If possible,
you could make this into a PowerPoint slide to share your ideas with the rest of the class.


12.3 Reactions of the halide ions


In this section, we consider the reactions of the negatively charged halide ions formed by the halogens.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 12.1


 


Testing for halide ions
We can identify the halide ions, and by using simple chemical tests. If an
unknown compound is dissolved in dilute nitric acid and silver nitrate solution is added, a precipitate
will form if the unknown solution contains halide ions. The precipitate will be silver chloride (AgCl),


silver bromide (AgBr) or silver iodide (Agl) (see Figure 12.4).
These precipitates are similar in colour. We can then use a further test to help us distinguish one
precipitate from another. We can add ammonia solution - dilute ammonia solution followed by


concentrated ammonia solution - to verify the result. The results of the tests are shown in Table 12.5.
The general equation for the precipitation reaction with silver nitrate solution is:
AgNO3(aq) + > AgX(s) +


where represents the halide ion.
The nitrate ions can be left out to produce the ionic equation. They are called ‘spectator ions’, i.e. ions


that do not get involved in the reaction:


IMPORTANT


Ag*(aq) + > AgX(s)


The ammonia can form complex ions that are soluble in water when added to:


 
silver chloride, as it forms soluble complex ions with dilute ammonia


e silver bromide, as it forms soluble complex ions with concentrated ammonia.


Silver iodide precipitate does not dissolve on adding dilute or concentrated ammonia solution.


 
Figure 12.4: Colours of the silver halide precipitates: silver chloride (on the left), silver bromide and silver iodide (on


the right).


 
chloride, | white dissolves dissolves



bromide, | cream remains insoluble dissolves



iodide, | | pale yellow remains insoluble remains insoluble


Table 12.5: The results of positive tests for halide ions.


 


 


Reactions of halide ions with concentrated sulfuric acid
Compounds that contain or ions will react with concentrated sulfuric acid. All of these reactions

produce one or more toxic gases, so they must be performed with great care in a fume cupboard.
We can prepare hydrogen chloride gas by dropping concentrated sulfuric acid slowly onto crystals of
sodium chloride (see the apparatus in Figure 12.5).


   


concentrated sulfuric acid


jar lid
hydrogen


sodium chloride


chloride + concentrated sulfuric acid
Figure 12.5: Preparing a sample of hydrogen chloride gas. Hydrogen chloride gas is denser than air, so it displaces the air


from the gas jar as it collects.


 
The reaction that takes place is:
NaCl(s) + +


The hydrogen chloride (HCI) gas produced is visible as white fumes.
However, we cannot use the same reaction to prepare samples of pure hydrogen bromide or hydrogen
iodide. We saw in Section 12.2 how it gets increasingly easy to decompose the hydrogen halides going


down the group.
When the hydrogen halides decompose into their elements, the halide part of the molecule in HBr and HI is
oxidised. Concentrated sulfuric acid is a relatively strong oxidising agent. It is not strong enough to oxidise
HCI, but concentrated sulfuric acid will oxidise and decompose HBr and HI. So, any HBr or HI formed in the
reaction between sodium bromide, or sodium iodide, and concentrated sulfuric acid undergoes further


oxidation.
With sodium bromide, hydrogen bromide is produced in the initial reaction:


NaBr(s) + + HBr(g)
This is followed by oxidation of HBr(g). The sulfuric acid itself is reduced to sulfur dioxide gas as it oxidises


the HBr formed:
2HBr(g) + Br2(g) + +


A reddish brown gas is seen. This is the element bromine,
With sodium the sulfuric acid is reduced to several sulfur products as it oxidises the hydrogen iodide
formed to different extents. The products of the oxidation of HI are sulfur dioxide, sulfur and hydrogen

sulfide, as shown in the reactions below:
Nal(s) + NaHSO,(s) + HI(g)

followed by oxidation of HI(g):
2HI(g) + + +

and:
6HI(g) + > + S(s) +


and:
8HI(g) + > + +


Several observations can be made here:
sulfur is seen as a yellow solid


hydrogen sulfide has a strong smell of bad eggs


iodine is produced as a violet / purple vapour.
Therefore, NaBr or Nal produce a mixture of gases when they react with concentrated sulfuric acid, so this


is not a good way to prepare a sample of the gases HBr or HI.


IMPORTANT


It gets easier to oxidise the hydrogen halides going down Group 17.


 
In the reactions above, the bromide ions in HBr, and the iodide ions (I~) in HI, act as reducing agents.
The bromide and iodide ions are electron donors. As they reduce the sulfuric acid, their oxidation numbers


increase from —1 to 0 (zero) and bromide and iodide ions are oxidised.


Question
5 You suspect that a solid compound might be potassium bromide. Describe how you would test


your idea. Then describe the positive results you would get if you were correct.
b i Working with a partner, discuss what you would see in a test-tube in which concentrated
sulfuric acid is added dropwise to solid potassium iodide that you would not see if the acid


was added to potassium chloride.
ii Write equations, including state symbols, to describe the reactions taking place in the test-
tube between concentrated sulfuric acid and potassium iodide. Check your equations
against those of another pair of learners. Are the reactants and products and their formulae


correct? Are their state symbols correct? Do the equations balance?

with your partner which one of the following ions is the strongest reducing agent:


A
chloride




Discuss together why that ion would be the best electron donor of the four ions in terms of ionic
radius and shielding of the nuclear charge. Then write an answer that also considers the size of


the charge carried by the nuclei of the ions.


IMPORTANT

 
The halide ions are increasingly effective as reducing agents going down Group 17.


12.4 Disproportionation reactions
The element chlorine oxidation number = 0) undergoes a type of redox reaction called
disproportionation when it reacts with alkali. We can think of disproportionation as a ‘self-reduction /
oxidation’ reaction. When chlorine reacts with dilute alkali, some chlorine atoms are reduced and some are


oxidised in the same reaction. The actual reaction that takes place depends on the temperature.


Chlorine in cold alkali (15 °C)


Cl,(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) + NaCl(aq) + NaClO(aq) +
sodium


The ionic equation for the reaction is:
+ + +
0 -1 +1


oxidation number of Cl
The ionic equation for this redox reaction can be split into two half-equations, showing the reduction and


oxidation.
e The reduction reaction (in which chlorine’s oxidation number is reduced is):
te
oxidation number of
The oxidation reaction taking place at the same time is:
+ + H,O + e


oxidation number of Cl 0 +1


 


Chlorine in hot alkali (70 °C)
When we add chlorine and hot concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxide a different disproportionation


reaction takes place:
+ + NaClO;(aq) +


+5
0
oxidation


number reduction


of Cl


 


oxidation


Chlorination of water
Adding a small amount of chlorine to a water supply will kill bacteria and make the water safer to drink.


The chlorine undergoes disproportionation in water:
+ HCl(aq) +


oxidation number of 0 +1
HCIO is called acid. It sterilises water by killing bacteria. Some of the HCIO dissociates in water to


produce which also acts as a sterilising agent.


 


with another learner to discuss these tasks:
describe the colours of, and explain the trend in volatility of, the Group 17 elements


chlorine, bromine and iodine?


b Make a list of the key words in this chapter and discuss their meaning with another learner.


2 Work with another learner to reflect on the importance of using oxidation numbers in
understanding the reactions of Group 17 elements and their compounds. Try to use changes in


oxidation state to judge which species in a redox reaction is oxidised and which is reduced.
Discuss which parts of this chapter you enjoyed most, and which, if any, you still feel unsure

about. You can use the checklist after the Summary to help you to decide.



SUMMARY
The halogens chlorine, bromine and iodine exist as covalent diatomic molecules. They become increasingly less
volatile and more deeply coloured on descending Group 17. Their volatility decreases as instantaneous dipole-


induced dipole forces between molecules increase.
All the halogen elements are oxidising agents: they are electron acceptors. Their power as oxidising agents


decreases descending Group 17.
All the halide ions can act as reducing agents: they are potential electron donors. Their power as reducing agents


increases descending Group 17.


The reactivity of the halogens decreases descending the group.
It gets easier to oxidise the hydrogen halides going down Group 17, as the strength of the hydrogen-halogen bond


decreases.


Chlorine reacts with cold hydroxide ions in a disproportionation (‘self-reduction-oxidation’) reaction.
A different disproportionation reaction takes place between chlorine and hot alkali, producing NaCl(aq), NaClO3(aq)


and water.
An important use of chlorine is in the prevention of disease by chlorination of water supplies. The reaction between


chlorine and water also involves disproportionation.


 


EXAM E QUESTIONS


You will need a copy of the Periodic Table (see Appendix 1) to answer some of these questions.
table below shows a reactant and a product from different redox reactions involving halogens


and their compounds. Use the table to answer both parts of this question.



conversion of reactant to product, A to D, involves the greatest change in

 
oxidation state? [1]

b many of the changes in the table are examples of oxidation?

A

B 2


D 4 [1]

[Total: 2]

2 Give the molecular formula of bromine.
the elements bromine, chlorine and iodine in order of boiling point, starting with the [2]


lowest.


[2]


c the reasons for the trend described in part b. [Total: 5]

3 Identify which of these mixtures will result in a chemical reaction:

bromine solution and sodium chloride solution

ii iodine solution and sodium bromide solution

chlorine solution and potassium bromide solution

bromine solution and sodium iodide solution

Write a balanced chemical equation for each reaction that occurs in part a.

the type of reaction that occurs in part a.

Describe the trend that the reactions in part a display.
one of the reactions that occurs in part a, identify the substance oxidised and the [2]

substance reduced.


f one of the reactions that occurs in part a, rewrite the equation as an ionic equation.


[2]


The element chlorine is a stronger oxidising agent than bromine. Explain why. [Total: 15]


4 Copy and complete the equations below, including state symbols.
i + NaCl(aq) [2]
ii AgNO3(aq) + NaBr(aq) >... [2]

[2]
iii AgNO3(aq) + Nal(aq) >...


 


SELF-EVALUATION



describe the colours of Group 17 elements
explain the trend in volatility of the Group 17 elements


chlorine, bromine and iodine
explain the relative reactivity of these Group 17 elements as


oxidising agents (and the halide ions as reducing agents)


explain the reactions of the elements with hydrogen
explain the relative thermal stabilities of the hydrides (in


terms of bond strengths)
explain the reactions of halide ions with aqueous silver ions,


followed by adding aqueous ammonia
explain the reactions of halide ions with concentrated sulfuric


acid
explain the disproportionation reactions of chlorine with cold,


and with hot, aqueous sodium hydroxide


explain the use of chlorine in water purification.
See


section...



N


N


 
Needs


more work
Almost


there
Ready to

move on



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


 


EFORE YOU START
Working with a partner, discuss the bonding in an ammonia molecule, NH3. Then draw a dot-and-


cross diagram of the molecule.
2 a_ Give the shape of a methane, molecule.


with a partner why a methane molecule is this shape.


The oxidation number of nitrogen can vary.Give nitrogen’s oxidation number in:
a
b NO


4 Discuss with a partner which substance is acting as an acid and which is a base this reaction.


+ H30*(aq) +
Draw a reaction pathway diagram that could be used as a PowerPoint slide to explain to the rest of


your class how a catalyst works.


 
Ammonia (NH3) is a simple compound that can be made using nitrogen gas It is used to make
ammonium compounds that are very important fertilisers. Ammonium salts commonly used in
fertilisers include ammonium chloride ammonium nitrate (NH,NO3), ammonium phosphate


and ammonium sulfate
Nitrogen is removed from the soil when plants absorb nitrates through their roots as they grow. When
farmers harvest their crops, the nitrogen is not replaced, as the plants do not die naturally and rot
back into the soil. So farmers use fertilisers, mainly ammonium compounds, to replace this essential


nitrogen in the soil.
Nitrogen-based fertilisers must be soluble in water for plants to absorb the nitrate ions they provide.
This has created an environmental problem. The nitrates can be washed, or leached, out of the soil by
rain into groundwater. These nitrates can then end up in rivers and lakes. Once in rivers and lakes, the
nitrates promote the growth of algae (a simple water plant) on the surface, causing eutrophication


(Figure 13.1).

 
Figure 13.1: Fertilisers leached from farmland have caused eutrophication in this river.


 


When fertilisers are washed from the soil into rivers:
e Abloom of algae can spread across the surface, blocking out the light for other plant life in the


water.
e When the plants and algae die, bacteria in the water feed on them, decomposing the plant


material.
The bacteria multiply rapidly with so much food available, using up the dissolved oxygen in the


water.
e Fish extract dissolved oxygen from water, taken in through their gills. Without this dissolved oxygen


they die, affecting the whole ecosystem.
Eutrophication isn’t the only problem with fertilisers being leached from the soil. Nitrates have also
been detected in our drinking water, especially in agricultural areas. People are worried that nitrates in
drinking water cause ‘blue baby’ syndrome (when a newborn baby’s blood is starved of oxygen), as
well as stomach cancer. But others argue that links between nitrates and diseases have not been

proven and that recommended nitrate levels are set unrealistically low.
Farmers can help limit the amount of nitrates in watercourses by adding the most economical amounts
of fertilisers at the right time of year. This will minimise the leaching of excess fertiliser from the soil


and into our rivers and lakes.


Questions for discussion


Working with another learner or group of learners:
e Discuss the statement ‘Nitrogen-based fertilisers do more harm than good.’ Then feedback any


conclusions you make to the whole group.
e Try to make suggestions that could help reduce any harmful effects caused by the large-scale use


of fertilisers.


 


13.1 Nitrogen gas
Nitrogen is in Group 15 of the Periodic Table. It is a non-metallic element that makes up about 78% of the


Earth’s atmosphere. It exists as diatomic molecules,
Nitrogen gas is the main unreactive gas in air that dilutes the effects of the reactive gas, oxygen. To


understand the lack of reactivity of nitrogen gas, we have to look at the bonding within its molecules.
The electronic configuration of a nitrogen atom is 1s? 2s? 2p3. Its atoms need to gain three electrons to
achieve the noble gas configuration of neon. Nitrogen atoms do this by forming a triple covalent bond


between two N atoms (see Figure 13.2).
two nitrogen atoms (2,5) nitrogen molecule


each is now (2,8)


Figure 13.2: The triple bonding in a nitrogen molecule,


 
The triple covalent bond is very strong. Its bond energy is almost 1000 kJ This bond is difficult to
break and so nitrogen gas will only react under extreme conditions. For example, the nitrogen and oxygen


in the air do react together during thunderstorms (Figure 13.3).


 


Figure 13.3: Nitrogen oxides are formed when lightning strikes.


 

The complete oxidation of the nitrogen gas takes place in three steps:
Step 1: Lightning provides the high activation energy needed for the oxidation of the unreactive nitrogen
gas to form nitrogen(II) oxide:


+ O2(g) + 2NO(g)
oxide


The oxide formed is then further oxidised by oxygen in the air to give nitrogen(IV) oxide,
Step 2: 2NO(g) +
nitrogen(IV) oxide
Nitrogen(IV) oxide dissolves in water droplets in the air, and reacts with more oxygen, to form a dilute
solution of nitric acid. The dilute acid falls to the Earth in rain:
Step 3: + H,O(1) +


nitric acid
This sequence of reactions in the atmosphere forms part of the natural nitrogen cycle. In this way, nitrogen


from unreactive, insoluble nitrogen gas can get into the soil in a soluble form that plants can absorb. The
plants can then use the nitrate ions, from the dilute nitric acid to make proteins. These proteins are


essential for healthy growth of the plants.
Question


Explain the lack of reactivity of nitrogen gas.


There are three steps shown above in the complete oxidation of nitrogen gas.
Which row in the table shows the correct change in the oxidation number of nitrogen in each of


the three steps?


 
c at the three steps, decide which option describes what happens to the nitrogen in each of


the three steps:


 
Now share your answers to Question 1 with another learner, and discuss your reasoning. Refer to the


transfer of electrons when explaining the answer to part b.


13.2 Ammonia and ammonium compounds
Ammonia, NH3, is a very important compound of nitrogen. It is the only common alkaline gas. To test for


ammonia gas, use damp red litmus paper. The litmus paper will turn blue in the alkaline gas.
In industry, scientists make ammonia on a large scale using the Haber process (for details of the process


see Chapter 8).


No(g) + = 2NH3(g)


nitrogen ammonia
The bonding in ammonia is shown in Figure 13.4. You learned why the presence of a lone pair of electrons


on the nitrogen atom causes ammonia molecules to have a pyramidal shape in Section 4.4.
lone pair



Figure 13.4: A dot-and-cross diagram showing the covalent bonding in an ammonia molecule and its triangular pyramidal


shape. The shape is explained in Section 4.4.


 
You have also learned that nitrogen’s lone pair of electrons can be donated to an from an acid,


forming a co-ordinate (or dative) covalent bond (see Section 4.3 and Figure 13.5 below).
Figure 13.5: The co-ordinate (dative) covalent bond is shown by the arrow that points from the donor atom (N) to the


acceptor of the lone pair (H* ion).


 
The positive charge on the ammonium ion formed is spread over the whole ammonium ion. The charge is
not concentrated on the hydrogen ion that accepted the lone pair of electrons. Chemists have found that


all the bonds in the NH,* ion are the same length. This is evidence that all four covalent bonds in the


NH,* ion are equivalent and the positive charge is evenly spread around the ion.


Basicity of ammonia
When ammonia donates its lone pair of electrons to an ion, as described above, ammonia is acting as a


base in this reaction. Remember from Section 8.6 that we can define bases as ‘proton (or
ion) acceptors’:


NH3(aq) + > (aq)

ammonium ion
Ammonia is an example of a weak base, as described in Section 8.6. In an aqueous solution of ammonia,
an equilibrium mixture is established:


NH3(aq) + = +
The position of equilibrium lies well over to the left so there is a greater concentration of ammonia
molecules in the solution than hydroxide ions. This makes the ammonia solution only weakly alkaline,
unlike a strong base such as sodium hydroxide, which dissociates (splits up into aqueous ions) completely


in solution.
If we heat an ammonium salt with a base, the ammonium ion, NH,*, produces ammonia gas, NH3. We use
this reaction to prepare ammonia gas in the laboratory. Ammonium chloride and calcium hydroxide, both in


the solid state, are usually mixed together, then heated (see the apparatus in Figure 13.6).


+ + + 2NH3(g)
This is an acid-base reaction, with NH,* acting as an acid (proton, Ht, donor) and acting as a base


(proton, acceptor).
ammonia
ammonium as
chloride and g


calcium


hydroxide
damp red
litmus paper


turns blue
calcium oxide
to dry the


ammonia


 


Figure 13.6: Preparing ammonia gas from an ammonium salt, and a base,


 
We can use the acid-base reaction of an ammonium salt with a base as the basis of the test for ammonium
ions. If an unknown compound contains ions, it will give off ammonia when heated with a base. The


ammonia given off will turn damp red litmus paper blue.


Question


2 Give the formula of an ammonium ion.
with a partner, the difference in the H-N-H bond angles of an ammonium ion compared
with an ammonia molecule. Reflect on each step you need to go through to arrive at your answer.


Then make a list of the sequence.
Write a balanced chemical equation, including state symbols, for the reaction of ammonia


solution with dilute nitric acid.
d i Write a balanced chemical equation, including state symbols, for the reaction of solid


ammonium sulfate with solid sodium hydroxide.


ii Discuss with a partner why the reaction in part i can be classified as an acid-base reaction.


13.3 Nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere
At the start of this chapter we explained why nitrogen gas is so unreactive. However, in the extreme
conditions in a thunderstorm, lightning can trigger the reaction between nitrogen and oxygen to form


gaseous nitrogen oxides: nitrogen(II) oxide, NO, and nitrogen(IV) oxide,
A similar oxidation of nitrogen takes place at the high temperature inside a car engine. In the engine, a
mixture of air (which is mainly nitrogen, 78%, and oxygen, 21%) and fuel is compressed and ignited by a
spark. Under this high pressure and high temperature, nitrogen can form nitrogen oxides. These oxides of


nitrogen are then released into the atmosphere through the car’s exhaust fumes.


Nitrogen oxides pollute our atmosphere. They cause acid rain and photochemical smog.


Acid rain
You learned earlier that oxide, formed in lightning strikes, is oxidised to form nitrogen(IV) oxide


in air:


2NO(g) =2NO2(g)
This is followed by further oxidation to nitric acid when nitrogen(IV) oxide dissolves and reacts in water with


oxygen:


+1.5 O2(g)
The water is often in the form of tiny droplets that make up clouds. The droplets get larger as the
temperature drops when clouds rise. When heavy enough the droplets, containing dilute nitric acid, will fall


as acid rain.
Dilute sulfuric acid is also found in acid rain. This comes from another pollutant called sulfur dioxide gas (or
sulfur(IV) oxide). Nitrogen oxides, as well as causing acid rain directly, can also act as catalysts in the
reactions that make dilute sulfuric acid in the atmosphere. NO and NO, catalyse the oxidation of sulfur
dioxide gas, during the formation of acid rain. The gas sulfur trioxide, SO3, that is produced by this

oxidation of reacts with rainwater, forming dilute sulfuric acid:

+ >
The reactions below show the catalytic activity of the nitrogen oxides:


+ NO2(g) > SO3(g) + NO(g)
Then is regenerated as NO reacts with oxygen in the air:


NO(g) + $02(g) > NO2(g)
This molecule can then go on to oxidise another sulfur dioxide molecule. At the same time, the
reaction also produces an NO molecule to make another molecule. This will oxidise another sulfur


dioxide molecule, and so on. Therefore, effectively catalyses the oxidation of SO>.


Photochemical smog
The oxides of nitrogen are also dangerous in the atmosphere because they react to make other pollutants.
These other pollutants formed are called secondary pollutants. This is because they are not given off
directly from human activity: for example, they are not vehicle exhaust gases or gases from power plants.
Nitrogen oxides are examples of primary pollutants as they are given off directly into the air from the

source of pollution.
Other primary pollutants in exhaust fumes are volatile organic compounds (VOCs). These are largely
unburnt hydrocarbons from fuel, and their oxidised products. The VOCs can react in sunlight with oxides
of nitrogen to make peroxyacetyl nitrate (also called PAN). Its chemical formula can be written as
Sunlight provides the energy needed to start the reactions off in the atmosphere, so we call
them photochemical reactions.


 
Figure 13.7: Photochemical smog hangs over Los Angeles in certain weather conditions. The word ‘smog’ is derived from


the two words ‘smoke’ and ‘fog’.


 


IMPORTANT
PAN is one of the harmful pollutants found in photochemical smog (Figure 13.7). PAN affects the lungs


and eyes, and in high concentrations also affects plant-life.


 


Reducing the effects of nitrogen oxides
Nowadays, car exhaust systems are fitted with catalytic converters to help reduce the pollutants from
motor vehicles (see Section 15.2). The reaction of pollutant gases inside the converter takes place on the
surface of the hot catalyst, for example platinum. The nitrogen oxides are reduced to form harmless


nitrogen gas, which is released from the vehicle’s exhaust pipe.


2CO(g) + 2NO(g) > 2CO2(g) +
Question
3 State one source of nitrogen oxides in our atmosphere that is:
i natural
ii human-made.
b i Explain why PAN is called a secondary pollutant.


ii the type of pollution PAN contributes to.
State the condition needed to start off the reaction between VOCs and nitrogen oxides that


produces PAN in the atmosphere.
with a partner how nitrogen oxides are involved in the formation of atmospheric sulfur


trioxide (SO3). Then each write your own explanation, including equations.


The following reaction takes place in a car’s catalytic converter once it is warmed up:


2CO(g) + 2NO(g) > 2CO2(g) +


Use oxidation numbers to explain which species is reduced and which is oxidised in the reaction.

REFLECTION

Work with another learner to discuss:


the lack of reactivity of nitrogen gas
basicity of ammonia and the formation and structure of the ammonium ion


c the displacement of ammonia from its ammonium salts.
Now summarise the role of nitrogen oxides in atmospheric pollution. Create a mind map, with
‘Oxides of nitrogen’ in its centre. Do you feel you understand more about atmospheric pollution


now?


Make a list of the key words in this chapter so far and explain their meanings to another learner.
Work with another learner to decide which aspects of this chapter you enjoyed most and which

you did not enjoy. Then discuss the reasons why.



SUMMARY
Nitrogen, is a very unreactive gas because of the high bond energy of the NEN triple bond.
Ammonia, NH3, is a common compound of nitrogen. Its molecules have a triangular pyramidal shape.


An ammonia molecule can act as a base, accepting an H* ion to form an ammonium ion,


Ammonia gas is given off from ammonium salts by heating them with a base.
Nitrogen oxides are formed naturally during lightning strikes, when nitrogen gas is oxidised. These gaseous nitrogen
oxides are also formed in internal combustion engines and become pollutants in the atmosphere, contributing to


acid rain.
Sulfur dioxide gas is the main cause of acid rain. In the atmosphere, the oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide


is catalysed by oxides of nitrogen.
PAN, peroxyacetyl nitrate, is a pollutant found in photochemical smog. It is formed by reactions between oxides of


nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons and other VOCs (volatile organic compounds).


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


is made from its elements in the Haber process.


b
[1]


[1]
Give the formula of ammonia.


Write a balanced equation for the formation of ammonia in the Haber process.
Explain how the ammonia molecule acts as a base when it dissolves in water. Include an [2]


equation in your answer.

For the ammonium ion, give the following:
[1]

[2]
ii shape, including its bond angles.
Give the formulae of the following ammonium salts:
[1]
i chloride
[1]
ammonium nitrate
[1]
iii ammonium sulfate
Ammonium chloride reacts with calcium hydroxide when heated to produce ammonia
gas.
[1]
i Is this reaction carried out using solids or solutions?

1
ii Write the balanced equation for this reaction.

of the following types of reaction is this an example of?

Acid-base

B Combustion

C Redox


[1]

[1]


Describe how you could test for ammonia gas. [Total: 14]


is the element below nitrogen in Group 15 of the Periodic Table. Its atomic number is




Which molecule shows phosphorus in its lowest oxidation state?

A





D PH;


[1]


Write the electronic configuration of a phosphorus atom.
Suggest which element, phosphorus or nitrogen, has the higher first ionisation energy [4]


and explain your reasoning.


The hydride of phosphorus is commonly called phosphine, PH3.
Suggest the shape of a molecule of phosphine, and predict the bond angles, [4]

explaining your reasoning.
Phosphorus, like nitrogen, can form a negatively charged ion if it reacts with a metal at
high temperatures. With magnesium, its phosphide has the formula



the charge on the phosphide ion in magnesium phosphide. [1]


[1]
[1]


[Total: 13]


ii State which element has the same electronic configuration as the phosphide ion.


iii Suggest the structure of magnesium phosphide.


SELF-EVALUATION
Needs Almost Ready to


i more work there move on


explain the lack of reactivity of nitrogen gas
explain the basicity of ammonia, and the formation and 32


structure of the ammonium ion
explain the displacement of ammonia from its ammonium


salts
state the industrial importance of ammonia and nitrogen


compounds derived from ammonia
explain the natural and human-made occurrences of oxides of
nitrogen and their catalytic removal from the exhaust gases of


internal combustion engines
explain why atmospheric oxides of nitrogen are pollutants,
including their role in the formation of photochemical smog


and the catalytic oxidation of atmospheric sulfur dioxide.

 



images


LEARNING INTENTIONS


In this chapter you will learn how to:


e define the term hydrocarbon and describe how alkanes are simple hydrocarbons with no functional group


e deduce the molecular and / or empirical formula of a compound, given its structural, displayed or skeletal formula
e interpret, name and use the general, structural, displayed and skeletal formulae of the alkanes, alkenes,
halogenoalkanes, alcohols (including primary, secondary and tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters,


amines (primary only) and nitriles


explain and use the following terminology associated with organic reactions and their mechanisms:


functional group


e homolytic and heterolytic fission


e free radical, initiation, propagation, termination


e nucleophile, electrophile, nucleophilic, electrophilic


e addition, substitution, elimination, hydrolysis, condensation


oxidation and reduction


explain and identify isomerism, including chiral centres and geometrical isomers


« deduce possible isomers from a given molecular formula
describe, give bond angles and explain the shape of molecules in terms of their sp, sp? and sp? hybridised atomic


orbitals, and their o bonds and m bonds


e describe and explain the different types of structural isomerism and stereoisomerism.


BEFORE YOU START


with a partner which type of atoms form covalent bonds (metals or non-metals).


Then work together to draw a dot-and-cross diagram of a carbon dioxide molecule.


Give the shape of a methane, molecule and the H-C-H bond angles.
Work with a partner to think up a model to explain the meaning of ‘electronegativity’ to a younger


person.


Which two of the following are true about a molecule of ethene,


A
B
c


D
It contains one sigma bond and five pi (m) bonds
It contains five sigma bonds and one pi (m) bond


Three of the carbon atoms’ atomic orbitals have become sp? hybridised


Four of the carbon atoms’ atomic orbitals have become sp? hybridised


 
Living things are made of atoms covalently bonded to form molecules of organic compounds (Figure


14.1). Almost all of these molecules of life are based on carbon compounds.


 
Figure 14.1: Organic compounds form the basis of all living things. Carbon atoms tend to form the ‘backbone’ of
organic molecules: from the proteins in muscles and enzymes to the DNA (see above) that determines our


characteristics.

 
Life is complicated and needs a great variety of different compounds. A great variety of organic



compounds is possible because every carbon atom can bond with other carbon atoms to form chains
and rings. We often find these chains and rings bonded to atoms of other elements, such as hydrogen,


oxygen and nitrogen. This explains the millions of organic compounds that exist.
Note that not all carbon compounds are classified as organic compounds. Scientists classify the oxides
of carbon and compounds containing carbonate and hydrogencarbonate ions as inorganic compounds.


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
Carbohydrates (compounds of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen) can vary in size between relatively
small molecules, such as glucose, to thousands of glucose molecules bonded together in
giant polymers, such as starch and cellulose. How does the size of organic molecules change their


properties? You might consider the process of digesting a starchy food to illustrate your answer.


 


14.1 Representing organic molecules
Figure 14.2 shows two types of three-dimensional (3D) diagram representing a selection of organic
molecules. Chemists use various types of model for different purposes. The compounds shown are called


hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons are compounds of carbon and hydrogen only.



a methane b ethene ¢ benzene octane


e 2,2,4-trimethylpentane f cyclohexane
Figure 14.2: Examples of the variety of hydrocarbons. a-c These hydrocarbons are shown as space-filling models. Such
models show the region of space occupied by the atoms and the surrounding electrons. d-g These hydrocarbons are


shown as ball-and-stick models, which enable bonds between atoms to be seen clearly.


 


The colours used in the modelling of molecules are shown in Table 14.1.
white hydrogen





Table 14.1: Colours used in molecular modelling in this text.


 


We can represent organic molecules using different types of formula.
The empirical formula gives us the least detail. It tells us the simplest ratio of the different types of
atoms present in the molecule. For example, an organic compound called propene has the empirical


formula This tells us that it has twice as many hydrogen atoms as carbon atoms in its molecules.
We can calculate empirical formulae from experimental data on the mass of each element in a sample
of a compound. Then we can convert the masses to the number of moles of each element present,


cancelled down to the simplest ratio.
2 The molecular formula shows us the actual numbers of each type of atom in a molecule. To find this we
need to know the relative molecular mass of the compound. The relative molecular mass of propene is
42. We know that its empirical formula is CH. This CH, group of atoms has a relative mass of 14, as the
relative atomic mass of C = 12 and H = 1. By dividing the relative molecular mass by the relative mass
of the empirical formula = 3), we see that there must be (3 x CH2) atoms in a propene molecule. So


its molecular formula is
3 Chemists can give more detail about a molecule by giving its structural formula. This tells us about
the atoms bonded to each carbon atom in the molecule. The structural formula of propene is


(also written as but the central H atom does not form a double bond).
This structural formula tells us how many hydrogen atoms are bonded to each carbon atom. In the case


of propene, it also shows us that two of the carbon atoms in the molecule are joined by a double bond.
4 Carbon-carbon double bonds are shown in a structural formula. However, the bonds within a
molecule are shown in its displayed formula. We can think of this representation as a 2D, or flattened
out, version of the ‘ball-and-stick’ models shown in Figure 14.2. The displayed formula of propene is


shown in Figure 14.3.
H H


H H


Figure 14.3: The displayed formula of propene, showing all the bonds in the molecule.


 
A simplified version of the displayed formula is called the formula. It has all the symbols for
carbon and hydrogen atoms removed, as well as the carbon to hydrogen bonds. The carbon to carbon


bonds are left in place. Figure 14.4 shows the skeletal formula of propene.


Figure 14.4: The skeletal formula of propene.


 
All other atoms that are not carbon or hydrogen, and their bonds, are included in the skeletal formula of
an organic molecule. You can see the displayed and skeletal formulae of an alcohol called butan-2-ol in


Figure 14.5. Notice that the skeletal formula includes the H atom in group.


a H b



O OH
H





H H H H


Figure 14.5: a The displayed formula of butan-2-ol. b The skeletal formula of butan-2-ol.


 
You can see the ‘zig-zag’ in the carbon chain shown in a skeletal formula in the 3D representations of
hydrocarbons in Figure 14.2. You will see more detailed 3D displayed formulae later in this chapter,
when we look at optical isomers (see Section 14.6). Figure 14.6 shows the 3D displayed formula of


butan-2-ol.


H OH



\


H
Figure 14.6: The 3D displayed formula of butan-2-ol. The ‘wedge’ bond is sticking out of the plane of the paper and
the ‘dashed-line’ or ‘open wedge’ bond is sticking into the plane of the paper. This figure shows both conventions -


either representation is acceptable.

 
5 With complex molecules, chemists sometimes find it useful to combine structural, 3D and skeletal
formulae when representing a molecule. The molecule of cholesterol shown in Figure 14.7 is one such
example.


CH3


HO


Figure 14.7: A useful way of combining structural, 3D and skeletal formulae.


 


Question
i On analysis, a hydrocarbon was found to contain 0.72 g of carbon and 0.18 g of hydrogen.


Calculate the empirical formula of the hydrocarbon.


ii Further investigation showed that the relative molecular mass of the hydrocarbon was 30.


Deduce its molecular formula.
contains the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Its empirical formula is

and its relative molecular mass is 60.
Deduce the molecular formula of the compound.

the displayed formula of:


i ethene (molecular formula


(molecular formula C3Hg).
d i Draw the skeletal formula of pentane, a straight-chain hydrocarbon with a molecular formula


of


ii Draw the structural formulae of the molecules shown in Figure 14.2, parts d, e and f.
Now share all your answers to Question 1 with a partner and correct the answers together. Ask your


teacher if you are unsure or cannot agree on an answer.


14.2 Homologous series of organic compounds
There are many classes of related organic compounds called homologous series, some of which are
shown in Table 14.2. Within each homologous series of compounds, all the compounds consist of molecules
with a particular atom, or grouping of atoms, called a functional group. Different classes of compounds


have different functional groups.
The functional group determines the characteristic chemical properties of the compounds that contain that
specific functional group. The functional group in an alkene is the C=C double bond. The functional group in

a carboxylic acid is the -COOH group.
The general formulae of some homologous series of compounds are given in Table 14.3. By substituting a
number for n (or m) in the general formula, you get the molecular formula of a particular compound
containing that functional group. Note that this formula assumes there is just one functional group present
in the molecule.


14.3 Naming organic compounds


Table 14.2 shows the names of the first ten alkanes and the stems used in naming other molecules.
Chemists have a system of naming organic compounds that can be applied consistently. This means that


they can communicate with each other clearly when referring to organic compounds.




Table 14.2: The stems used in naming simple aliphatic organic compounds that contain a hydrocarbon chain.


 


 
The homologous series of hydrocarbons called alkanes provides the basis of the naming system. The stem


of each name indicates how many carbon atoms are in the longest chain in one molecule of the compound.
We indicate the position of side-chains or functional groups by numbering the carbon atoms in the longest
chain. The numbering starts at the end that produces the lowest possible numbers in the name (Figure


14.8).



|


Figure 14.8: This is called 2-methylpentane, not 4-methylpentane. Its structural formula is CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2CH3.


 
Note that the hydrocarbon side-chain is shown in brackets in its structural formula. It is named by adding ‘-
yl’ to the normal alkane stem, in this case a methyl group. This type of group is called an alkyl group. If
there is more than one of the same alkyl side-chain or functional group, we indicate how many by inserting


di- (for two), tri- (for three) or tetra- (for four) in front of its name. Figure 14.9 shows an example.


CH3


CH3C —


CH3 CH3


Figure 14.9: This is 2,2,3-trimethylpentane.


 
Note that adjacent numbers in a name have a comma between them, whereas numbers are separated


from words by a hyphen.
If there is more than one type of alkyl side-chain, they are listed in the name in alphabetical order (Figure


14.10).


CH3


Figure 14.10: This is 3-ethyl-2-methylpentane. (The alkyl groups appear in its name in alphabetical order).


 
Table 14.3 shows some common homologous series together with their functional groups. It also shows


some examples.
alkenes
ethene
halogenoalkanes
where X = F, Cl,


chloromethane
alcohols R—OH


methanol CH30H
aldehydes



ethanal CH3CHO
ketones \
propanone CH3COCH3
carboxylic acids
G


ethanoic acid CH3COOH


esters
or


propyl ethanoate CH3COOCH2CH2CH3

 
amines


R— NH methylamine
2
nitriles R—C=N


ethanenitrile CH3CN
Table 14.3: Some common homologous series of organic compounds and their functional groups, general formulae, and


named examples, with their structural formulae.


   


 
Table 14.4 shows the structural formula and skeletal formula of a compound from each of the homologous


series shown in Table 14.3.


Question
2 Draw the displayed formula of:
i 2-methylbutane
ii


iii 2,4,6-trimethyloctane.


b i What is the name of this hydrocarbon?



|


the skeletal formula of the hydrocarbon molecule.
Now compare all your answers to Question 2 with those of others in a small group. Look at any
differences in your answers. Then explain the steps in your thinking to each other to agree on the


correct answer.
cl
halogenoalkanes 2-chloropropane, CH3CHCICH3




OH

aldehydes butanal, CH3CH2CH2CHO H


OH

ketones butanone, CH3COCH2CH3

carboxylic acids butanoic acid,



esters ethyl propanoate, CH3CH2COOCH2CH3


ZN


nitriles butanenitrile, CH3CH2CH2CN


Table 14.4: The structural and skeletal formula of examples from common homologous series.


 


 
In Table 14.3 we saw the names of compounds with common functional groups. We also use the numbering
system where necessary to indicate the position of the functional group in a molecule. For some functional
groups, no number is needed if the group can only be positioned at the end of a chain. Examples of this


include carboxylic acids such as butanoic acid, and aldehydes, such as pentanal,
As well as alkyl groups, you will also have to recognise aryl groups. Aryl compounds contain at least one
benzene ring. A benzene molecule has six carbon atoms arranged in a hexagon, with each carbon atom
bonded to one hydrogen atom. You will look at benzene and related compounds in more detail in Chapter


Figure 14.11 shows the displayed and skeletal formulae of benzene.




|


H


displayed formula formula


Figure 14.11: Ways of representing benzene.


 
If only one alkyl group is bonded to a benzene ring, we do not have to include a number in the name. This
is because all six carbon atoms in the ring are equivalent. However, at A Level, you will learn that with two
or more alkyl groups we need to indicate their positions, as shown in Figure 14.12. (You do not need to


recall this numbering for AS Level.)


CH3
CH3


CH3 CH3


methylbenzene 1,2-dimethylbenzene 1,4-dimethylbenzene


Figure 14.12: Naming aryl compounds.


 


Question
3 Using the skeletal formula of benzene in the formulae as shown in Figure 14.11, draw the


displayed formula of:
i propylbenzene


iii 1,3,5-triethylbenzene,
the displayed formula of 2-bromo-3,3-dichlorohexane.



of the following is the structural formula of the aldehyde 3,5-dimethylhexanal?





D


REFLECTION
At this point, reflect on your understanding of the basics of organic chemistry covered so far in
Chapter 14. This includes naming organic compounds and representing them by empirical,


molecular, structural and displayed formulae.


You should also recognise the common functional groups.
Work with a partner to ask each other five questions about the work covered so far. What does this


reveal about you as a learner?
Make a note of anything you are not sure about and think about things you could do to get a


better understanding of these. Then you will be on your way to mastering organic chemistry.


 


14.4 Bonding in organic molecules
We can explain the ability of a carbon atom to bond to other carbon atoms, and the shapes of the


molecules formed, by looking closely at the bonding involved.


Sigma (o) bonds
Each carbon atom has six electrons, with an electronic configuration of 1s? 2s? This means that carbon
has four electrons in its outermost shell. By forming single covalent bonds with four other atoms, a
carbon atom can gain the electronic configuration of the noble gas neon (see Section 4.2). These single


covalent bonds are known as sigma bonds.
The pair of electrons in a o bond is found in a region of space (described as a lobe) between the nuclei of
the two atoms sharing the electrons. The electrostatic attraction, between the negatively charged electrons


and the two positively charged nuclei, bonds the atoms to each other (see Section 4.3).
In many organic compounds each carbon atom forms four o bonds. The four bonding pairs of electrons
(which are all areas of negative charge) around each carbon atom repel each other. They position
themselves in a tetrahedral arrangement so that the bonding pairs are as far apart from each other as
possible. The tetrahedral bond angle is 109.5° (see Section 4.4). Figure 14.13 shows the 3D formula of an


ethane molecule. This gives an impression of the shape of an ethane molecule.
Figure 14.13: The bond angles are all close to 109.5° in an ethane molecule. The two carbon atoms, each forming four


sigma bonds, are said to be sp? hybridised (see Section 4.5).


 

Pi bonds
Carbon can also form double and triple bonds between its atoms in organic molecules, as well as forming
single bonds. A C=C double bond, as found in alkenes such as ethene, is made up of bond and a pi
bond. The carbon atoms involved in the double bond will each form three o bonds. This is an example of
sp? hybridisation (see Section 4.5). This leaves each carbon atom with one spare outer electron in a 2p
orbital. When these two p orbitals overlap they form a m bond. Figure 14.14 shows how the 7 bond is
formed in ethene.


p orbitals bond
( )=120°


H H


p orbitals
Figure 14.14: The overlap of two p orbitals results in a m bond. Ethene is described as a planar molecule. All the carbon
and hydrogen atoms in the ethene molecule lie in the same plane. The two carbon atoms are said to be sp? hybridised


(see Section 4.5).


 
The two lobes that make up the m bond lie above and below the plane of the atoms in an ethene molecule.
This maximises overlap of the p orbitals. The carbon atoms involved in the double bond are each
surrounded by three pairs of electrons in the o bonds. These are all in the plane of the molecule and repel


each other to give bond angles of about 120°.


You can read about the special case of m bonding in a benzene molecule in Section 25.1.
Carbon atoms can also form triple covalent bonds, C=C. These are found in the homologous series of


alkynes. The simplest example of an alkyne is ethyne, HC=CH.
When forming a triple bond, the carbon atoms’ p orbitals are sp hybridised (see Section 4.5). This leaves
two electrons in different p atomic orbitals on each of the bonding carbon atoms. The p orbitals overlap,


forming two 7 bonds, each containing two electrons.
The two lobes of one bond lie above and below the plane of the atoms in the ethyne molecule (as in
ethene). The two lobes of the other m bond lie in front of and behind the plane of the atoms in the ethyne


molecule.
This maximises overlap of the p orbitals, which in effect form a cylinder of electron density around the two
carbon atoms. The ethyne molecule is linear in shape, with all its atoms arranged in a straight line (Figure


14.15).


 
Figure 14.15: The overlap of four p orbitals resulting in two m bonds in ethyne. Ethyne is described as a molecule.
The two carbon atoms and both hydrogen atoms in the ethyne molecule lie in a straight line. The two carbon atoms are


said to be sp hybridised.


 


Question
4 Draw 3D formulae for:
i propane
ii propene
ethyne.


b i Join with a partner to discuss all the options in the questions below:


Which molecule is an example of carbon atoms adopting both sp and sp? hybridisation?
A
B




ii For the three incorrect options in part i, decide on the type of hybridisation of carbon atomic

orbitals in each molecule.
Swap your answers to Question 4 with another learner and mark each answers. Discuss your
reasoning when your answers are not the same and arrive at an agreed answer. Show these agreed
answers to your teacher if you are still in doubt.


14.5 Structural isomerism
We have seen how a molecular formula tells us the number and type of each atom in one
molecule of the compound. For example, a propene molecule, (Figure 14.16), contains three carbon


atoms and six hydrogen atoms:


Figure 14.16: The displayed formula of propene,


 
However, for a given molecular formula there may be different ways of arranging these atoms. This means
different molecules can be formed, with different structures, resulting in different compounds. Such
compounds with the same molecular formula but different structural formulae are called structural
isomers. For example, the molecular formula propene, could also describe cyclopropane (Figure


14.17).


 
Figure 14.17: The displayed formula of another possible structure, called a structural isomer, of molecules with the


formula Cyclopropane is an example of a cyclic alkane. Its structural formula is (CH2)3.


 
There are three types of structural isomerism:
position isomerism


2 functional group isomerism


chain isomerism.


Position isomerism
In position isomerism, it is the location of the functional group that varies in each isomer. An example is


provided by the compound with the molecular formula Its four possible isomers are shown in


Figure 14.18.


H H H H H H
Br H H H Br H



| |


Br H H H Br H


Figure 14.18: An example of position isomerism.


 
You need to take care when drawing the structural or displayed formula of different isomers not to repeat
the same structure. Remember that there is free rotation about single bonds. The three molecules


shown in Figure 14.19 are all 1,2-dibromopropane; they are not three different isomers of


 
H H H Br H H Br H
| | | is the | | | is the | |
same as H—C—C—C—H same as H—C C—Br
| |
H Br H H Br H H H—C—H
|


H
Figure 14.19: These are different ways of representing the same molecule because of free rotation about single


bonds.


 


Functional group isomerism
In functional group isomerism, there are different functional groups present. For example, given the


molecular formula C3HgO we can draw both an alcohol and an ether (Figure 14.20).


These two isomers have different functional groups and so have very different chemical properties.
H
/


O

=








|

H—C—


|


H


propan-1-ol methoxyethane

Figure 14.20: An example of functional group isomerism.



Chain isomerism
Chain isomers differ in the structure of their carbon ‘skeleton’. For example, butane and methylpropane are


chain isomers, both with the molecular formula of (Figure 14.21).
CH3CHCH3


|


CH3


butane methylpropane


Figure 14.21: An example of chain isomerism.


 
Question
5 four isomers in Figure 14.18.
the displayed formulae and name the structural isomers of
the displayed formulae and name the functional group isomers of C3H,O that are:
i an aldehyde


ii aketone.
the displayed formula and name an isomer of C3HgO that could be used as an example of


positional isomerism of one of the isomers in Figure 14.20.


e the displayed formulae and give the names of the isomers of
Check all your answers with a small group of other learners. Discuss any differences between your


answers and agree on the best answer for each question.


14.6 Stereoisomerism
Stereoisomers are compounds whose molecules have the same atoms bonded to each other, but with


different arrangements of the atoms in space.
There are two types of stereoisomerism:


1 geometrical (cis/trans) isomerism


isomerism.


Geometrical (cis/trans) isomerism
Unlike a single bond, there is no free rotation about a C=C double bond. This can result in a different


type of isomerism in unsaturated organic compounds. Figure 14.22 gives an example.
Br Br H Br



C=C C=C
\


H H Br H


cis-1,2-dibromoethene trans-1,2-dibromoethene


Figure 14.22: An example of geometrical (cis/trans) isomerism.


 
In cis-1,2-dibromoethene, both the Br atoms remain fixed on the same side of the C=C double bond as
there is no free rotation about this bond because of the presence of a m (pi) bond. However, in trans-1,2-
dibromoethene, the Br atoms are positioned across the C=C double bond. (Remember that the prefix


‘trans-’ means across.)
These two stereoisomers have different arrangements of the atoms in space, so they are different
compounds with different physical properties. Stereoisomers can also have some different chemical
properties. For example, they may react at different rates for the same reaction. Whenever we have
unsaturated compounds with the structures shown in Figure 14.23, we can have this geometrical (cis/trans)


type of isomerism.


A B A A A A
\ / \ /


or or c=C
/ \ / \ / \


E D B D B B
Figure 14.23: These three arrangements can result in geometrical (cis/trans) isomerism because there is restricted


rotation about the C=C double bond.

 
There is also geometrical (cis/trans) isomerism possible in substituted cyclic compounds. This is because of
the limited rotation about single bonds that make up the rings. We usually show the cis- and trans-
isomers using a combination of skeletal and 3D formulae. For example, cis-3-methylcyclopentanol and
trans-3-methylcyclopentanol:


CH3
OH OH


We can also show the two cis/trans isomers more clearly from a side view:
CH3 CH3
H OH
both and —OH groups The group points upwards whereas
point upwards (out of the paper) the —OH group points downwards


cis-isomer trans-isomer
Another example is a substituted compound of cyclobutane, with two groups substituted into its four-
membered ring. The two geometrical isomers below are called cis- and trans-cyclobutane-1,3-dicarboxylic


acid:
COOH COOH
COOH COOH


cis-isomer trans-isomer
In the cis-isomer, the two carboxylic acid groups are either both pointing above (as shown) or both below
the ring of four carbon atoms. In the trans-isomer, one carboxylic acid group points above the ring and one

below.


Optical isomerism
If a molecule contains a carbon atom that is bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms, it can form
two optical isomers. We can describe this carbon atom as an ‘asymmetric’ carbon atom because there is no


plane of symmetry in its molecule. The two different optical isomers, called enantiomers, are mirror
images of each other, and they cannot be superimposed (Figure 14.24). The carbon atom with the four


different groups attached to it is called the centre of the molecule.
CH3


|




CH;
|


mirror plane
Figure 14.24: This pair of molecules are optical isomers, referred to as enantiomers. Trying to superimpose the two
isomers is like trying to superimpose your left hand on top of your right hand, with them both facing downwards: it can’t


be done.


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 14.1


 


Modelling optical isomers
Using a molecular modelling kit, take a black carbon atom and attach four different coloured atoms to
it. Then make another model molecule that is its mirror image using the same colours. Now try


superimposing the two models so all the atoms match up. Can it be done?


 
Optical isomers differ in their effect on polarised light. Normal light is unpolarised. It can be thought of as
fluctuating electric and magnetic fields, vibrating at right angles to each other in every possible direction.
Passing this unpolarised light through a polariser results in polarised light, which vibrates in only one plane.
A pair of optical isomers will rotate the plane of polarised light by equal amounts but in opposite directions.


One will rotate the plane of polarised light clockwise and the other anticlockwise.
Organic molecules can contain more than one asymmetric carbon atom, i.e. more than one chiral centre. If
there are two asymmetric carbon atoms, then each of its chiral centres will rotate the plane of polarised


light. In this case, there will be four possible optical isomers.
As well as straight and branched chain molecules, substituted cyclic molecules can also have chiral centres
in their ring structures. To decide where the chiral centres are, we still have to find any carbon atoms that


are bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms.


Look at this example of a substituted cyclohexane molecule:
HO



In cyclohexane all the carbon atoms are bonded to two hydrogen atoms so there is no chiral centre. But
when you start substituting other groups or atoms to replace hydrogen atoms, there is a possibility of


asymmetric carbon atoms.
In the cyclic molecule shown we have a hydroxyl (-OH) group and an amine group introduced into
the ring. Let’s consider the carbon atom bonded to the hydroxyl group first. This carbon atom is also
bonded to a hydrogen atom (not shown in the skeletal formula). The other two groups bonded to it, making
up its four single bonds, are not the same. Imagine travelling around the ring in a clockwise direction from
this carbon atom, you come to four carbon atoms, each bonded to two hydrogen atoms. Then you come to
the carbon bonded to the group and one hydrogen atom, before arriving back where we started. We
can think of this group as After that, travel around the ring in the opposite direction, an
anti-clockwise direction, from same original carbon. This fourth bond from the carbon atom will be attached

to a group, so the original carbon atom has four different groups or atoms bonded to it:

* anHatom

group

e the group


e the group.
Now you follow the same process starting from the carbon atom bonded to the group. You will find


that this is also an asymmetric carbon atom. Therefore this cyclic molecule has two chiral centres.
Symmetrical substituted cyclic molecules will not have a chiral centre. Starting from the carbon atom(s)
bonded to the group(s) substituted into the ring, you will find two identical groups ‘going around’ the ring
in both the clockwise and the anticlockwise direction. Therefore, no carbon atom has four different groups


attached to it.
Question


6 a i Draw the displayed formulae and label the cis/trans isomers of but-2-ene.

ii the cis/trans isomers of 1-bromo-2-chlorocyclobutane.
b molecule CHBrCIF exhibits optical isomerism. Draw the 3D displayed formulae of both optical
isomers.



c i Which one of the following can have optical isomers?






ii the displayed formula of your chosen answer and clearly label its chiral centre.


the two molecules below, methylcyclohexane and 2-methylcyclohexanone:



methylcyclohexane 2-methylcyclohexanone


Compare the number of chiral centres in each molecule and clearly label any chiral centres.


e back to the structure of the cholesterol molecule in Figure 14.7.


How many chiral centres are present in a molecule?
A 2
B 4
c


D 8
14.7 Types of organic reaction and reaction


mechanisms
Chemists find it useful to explain organic reactions by summarising the overall reaction in a series of steps
called a reaction mechanism. Like all chemical reactions, organic reactions involve the breaking and


making of chemical bonds. There are two ways in which covalent bonds can break:
homolytic fission


e heterolytic fission.


Homolytic fission
In this type of bond breaking, both the atoms at each end of the bond leave with one electron from the pair
that formed the covalent bond. This is shown in Figure 14.25, using the simple example of a hydrogen


chloride molecule.


Figure 14.25: Homolytic fission of a covalent bond.


 
The species produced when a bond breaks homolytically are called free radicals. We can show the


formation of free radicals by using an equation:


HCl > +
and are free radicals. All free radicals have an unpaired electron (represented by the dot) and are


very reactive.


You can read more about a free-radical reaction in Section 15.2.
This type of reaction involves the formation of the free radicals in an initiation step. This requires an input


of energy to break a covalent bond, resulting in two free radicals.
The radicals formed can then attack reactant molecules, generating more free radicals. These reactions are
called propagation steps. You can think of these as a chain reaction which only stops when free radicals


react with each other.
Two free radicals reacting together will form a molecule, with no free radicals generated. We call this a


termination step.


The three steps in a free-radical reaction are:
initiation step: the formation of free radicals to start a reaction off


propagation steps: steps in a mechanism that regenerate more free radicals
termination step: the final step in a mechanism, when two free radicals meet and form a product


molecule.

Heterolytic fission
The second type of bond breaking involves the ‘uneven’ breaking of a covalent bond. In heterolytic fission,
the more electronegative atom takes both electrons in the covalent bond. Again, we can use hydrogen
chloride to illustrate this (Figure 14.26).


Figure 14.26: Heterolytic fission of a covalent bond.


 
We can show this type of bond breaking in an equation. A small curly arrow shows the movement of a pair
of electrons:


Ht +
The heterolytic fission of a bond can involve a bond, where X is an atom more electronegative than


carbon.


For example:


H,C— Br CH,* + Br


3
In this case, as the bond breaks, the Br atom takes both shared electrons, forming a bromide anion (a
negatively charged ion). This leaves the methyl group one electron short, resulting in the formation of a
positively charged ion. This type of alkyl ion is called a carbocation. These positively charged


carbocations often appear in reaction mechanisms (see Section 16.3).
There are three types of carbocations that you need to consider: primary, secondary and tertiary

carbocations (Figure 14.27).

R R
| 4



R
| |


H H
primary carbocation secondary tertiary carbocation


(least stable) carbocation (most stable)


Key: where R = an alkyl group


Figure 14.27: Carbocations and their stability relative to each other.


 
Note that the carbon atom with the positive charge only has three covalent bonds, not the usual four,
making it electron deficient. Any alkyl groups (e.g. -CH3, attached to the positively charged
carbon atom tend to be ‘electron donating’. We say the alkyl groups have a positive inductive effect. The
arrowheads on the bonds in Figure 14.27 are used to show the inductive effect of atoms or groups of


atoms.
The alkyl groups ‘push’ electrons away from themselves, and reduce the charge density of the positive
charge on the carbocation. This has the effect of spreading out the charge around the carbocation, making
it energetically more stable. This means that a tertiary carbocation, with its three ‘electron-donating’


groups is the most energetically stable of the three types of carbocation.


IMPORTANT


 
The more alkyl groups adjacent to the positively charged carbon atom, the more stable the


carbocation.
As a result of this, tertiary carbocations are more likely to form in reaction mechanisms than secondary
carbocations, and primary carbocations are least favoured. This has effects on the products of some


organic reactions, such as addition reactions to alkenes (see Section 15.3).


Carbocations are an example of a species called an electrophile.
When an electrophile accepts a pair of electrons, this results in the formation of a new covalent bond (see


Section 15.3).
You will also meet nucleophiles when studying organic reactions and their mechanisms. These are


electron-rich species, i.e. they carry a negative (—), or partial negative (6—), charge.
When a nucleophile donates a pair of electrons, this leads to the formation of a new covalent bond with the


electron-deficient atom under attack (see Section 18.4).
Question


7 Write an equation to show the homolytic fission of the CI-Cl bond in a chlorine molecule,
b an equation to show the heterolytic fission of the bond in chloromethane. Include a


curly arrow in your answer.


one of the following species is likely to act as a nucleophile?
A



C


your answer to part c.


Which one of the following species is likely to act as an electrophile?
A
B Ht


f Explain your answer to part e.
of these carbocations is most likely to form as an intermediate in an organic reaction?

Justify your answer.
A B
H H H
| |
H—C—C—C—C—H H—C—C—C—H
| |
H H H H
H—C—H

H



14.8 Types of organic reaction
Addition reactions involve the formation of a single product from two or more reactant molecules. An


example is the addition reaction between an alkene and bromine (see Section 15.3):


+
Elimination reactions result in the removal of a small molecule from a larger reactant molecule. An


example is the dehydration of an alcohol by concentrated sulfuric acid (see Section 17.3):


+
Condensation reactions involve a first step where addition takes place. This is followed by a second step
where elimination occurs to form the final product. You will meet condensation reactions in Chapter 18


when you study carbonyl compounds.
Substitution reactions involve the replacement of one atom, or a group of atoms, by another. For


example, the free-radical substitution of alkanes by chlorine in sunlight (see Section 15.2):
CH, + + HCI


Here, an H atom in CH, has been replaced by a Cl atom.
Hydrolysis is the breakdown of a molecule by water. We can speed up this type of reaction by adding acid


or alkali. For example, the hydrolysis of a halogenoalkane by water to give an alcohol (see Section 16.2):
+ + HBr
Hydrolysis with alkali is faster, and gives slightly different products:


+ NaOH > + NaBr
Oxidation is defined as the loss of electrons from a species. However, in organic reactions it is often simpler
to think of oxidation reactions in terms of the number of oxygen and / or hydrogen atoms before and


after a reaction.
An example is the partial oxidation of ethanol to ethanal using acidified potassium dichromate(VI) solution


(see Section 17.3):
+ CH3CHO + H20


before the reaction ethanol contains one O atom and six H atoms


after the reaction ethanal contains one O atom and four H atoms.


In effect, the ethanol loses two H atoms, so we can say that ethanol has been oxidised.
Notice that we use [O] to simplify the chemical equation describing oxidation reactions. This is commonly
used, but the equation must still be balanced: just like a normal equation. For example, in the complete
oxidation of ethanol to ethanoic acid, using the reagents above but under harsher conditions (see Section


+ 2[0] > CH3COOH +
[O] represents an oxygen atom from the oxidising agent. The 2 in front of the [O] is needed to balance the


equation for oxygen atoms.
For example, in the reduction of a ketone, using sodium tetrahydridoborate, NaBH, (see Section 18.3):


CH3COCH3 + 2[H] CH3CH(OH)CH3
Notice that we use [H] to simplify the chemical equation describing reduction reactions. [H] represents a
hydrogen atom from the reducing agent. The 2 in front of the [H] is necessary to balance the equation for


hydrogen atoms.


Question

8 these reactions, choosing from the types of reaction described above:
+ + HI
+ 2[H]


> + HBr


+


+ + HCI


REFLECTION
ideas introduced in this chapter will all be revisited in later organic chemistry chapters. It will
be useful for you to create a mind map now of the various ideas introduced. Put ‘Organic
chemistry’ at the centre and label the links branching out to the new concepts. These could


include ‘functional groups’, ‘bonding’, ‘isomers’, ‘mechanisms’, ‘types of reaction’.
Your mind map will be useful to refer back to when studying the other organic chapters and when


revising for exams.
Swap your mind map with another learner and discuss similarities and differences. Discuss the


strengths and weaknesses in both mind maps.

Then explain to each other the process you both applied when constructing your mind map.





SUMMARY
We can represent an organic molecule, with increasing detail, by using its:

empirical formula

molecular formula

structural formula


displayed formula


e 3D displayed formula.


Functional groups give organic compounds their characteristic reactions.
Important functional groups include alkenes, alcohols, halogenoalkanes, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids,


esters, amines and nitriles.
The shapes of organic molecules can be explained by the o and m bonds between carbon atoms, and the


hybridisation of their atomic orbitals.


There are two types of isomer: structural isomers and stereoisomers.
Structural isomers have the same molecular formula but different structural formulae. We can group these into

position, functional group or chain isomers.

Stereoisomers have the same molecular formula but different arrangement of their atoms in space.


Cis/trans isomers arise because of the restricted rotation around a C=C double bond.
Optical isomers contain a chiral centre (a carbon atom bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms),


resulting in mirror images of the molecule that cannot be superimposed.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


 
one of the following compounds does not need any numbers in its name? [1]
CH3CH=CHCH3





2 one of the molecules below contains a chiral centre? [1]
A B


CHO


CH3CH(CH3)CH3, is commonly used in the petrochemical industry.
aii Name the homologous series that methylpropane belongs to.
Give the molecular formula of methylpropane.
the empirical formula of methylpropane.
Draw the displayed formula of methylpropane.
Draw the skeletal formula of methylpropane.
Each carbon atom in methylpropane has hybridised atomic orbitals.
type of hybridisation is found in a molecule of methylpropane?
A hybridisation
sp? hybridisation
C hybridisation
hybridisation
ii Give the bond angles found within a molecule of methylpropane.
When methylpropane is passed over a hot aluminium oxide catalyst, it can be converted
into methylpropene.


[1]


To which homologous series of organic compounds does methylpropene belong?
ii can be converted back into methylpropane by heating with


hydrogen gas in the presence of a platinum / nickel catalyst:
+ Hy
What type of reaction best describes this reaction?

Oxidation
Elimination


Hydrolysis
1
Addition
1
d i Draw the displayed formula of a structural isomer of methylpropene.
1
Give the empirical formula of both isomers. [Total:
4 Acarbon compound P has the percentage composition 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen. Its
relative molecular mass was found to be 56.
4
Calculate its empirical formula.
1
ii Calculate its molecular formula.
down the names and displayed formulae of all the non-cyclic isomers of compound
P which have the following characteristics:

straight chain
[2]
branched chain. [Total: 13]
was investigating the best way to produce 1,2-dichloroethane. She devised two
methods, | and Il, of doing this.
reacted ethane with chlorine in the presence of UV light by the following reaction:
+
After doing this she found that 600 g of ethane gave 148.5 g of


[1]


Calculate how many moles of ethane there are in 600 g.
ii how many moles of 1,2-dichloroethane would have been formed if the yield

had been 100%.

iii Calculate how many moles of 1,2-dichloroethane there are in 148.5 g.
Calculate the percentage yield of 1,2-dichloroethane.

She reacted ethene with chlorine in the dark by the following reaction:

+ >

reaction 140 g of ethene gave 396 g of
Calculate the percentage yield for this reaction. Show your working.

There are isomers of the compound
Draw the displayed formulae of the isomers and name them.

from:

redox





addition

E hydrolysis

to give the type of reaction for:


i reaction |


ii Il. [Total:


SELF-EVALUATION


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on

interpret, name and use the general, structural, displayed and
14.1,
skeletal formulae of all the homologous series introduced in
14.2, 14.3
this chapter
deduce the molecular and/or empirical formula of a 14.1

compound, given its structural, displayed or skeletal formula
explain the following terms:
functional group
homolytic and heterolytic fission

free radical

initiation
propagation
termination
nucleophile
electrophile
nucleophilic

electrophilic

addition
substitution

elimination
hydrolysis
condensation


oxidation

reduction
a
b
c
d
e
f
9
h


i
j
k
I
m
n
°
p


q
describe and explain the shape of, and bond angles of, organic
molecules in terms of their sp, and sp? hybridised atomic

orbitals, and their o bonds and m bonds

describe and explain the different types of structural
14.5, 14.6

isomerism and stereoisomerism.


explain and identify isomerism, including chiral centres and


geometrical isomers

deduce | deduce possible isomers from a given molecular isomers from a given molecular | deduce possible isomers from a given molecular 14.5, 14.6



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


 


FORE YOU START
are four types of hybridisation of carbon atomic orbitals:
only sp
only sp?
only sp?


and sp?


Which do you find in the following molecules?

b



2 Give the names of:

ii
Give the structural formulae of:
2,3-dimethylhexane


pent-2-ene.
groups ‘electron withdrawing’ or ‘electron donating’ to their neighbouring carbon


atom?
Which type of carbocation is most energetically stable: primary, secondary or tertiary


carbocation?
4 Working with a partner, discuss the difference between an electrophile and a nucleophile, and what


we mean by a ‘reaction mechanism’.


HYDROCARBONS IN USE


 
Crude oil (Figure 15.1) is our main source of hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbons are compounds containing
carbon and hydrogen only. They provide us with fuels such as petrol, diesel and kerosene.
Hydrocarbons are also the starting compounds used to make many new compounds, such as most of


the plastics we use in everyday life.
Crude oil is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. It contains alkanes, cycloalkanes and arenes

(compounds containing benzene rings - see Chapter 25).
Cycloalkanes are saturated hydrocarbons in which there is a ‘ring’ consisting of three or more carbon
atoms. Imagine the two carbon atoms at each end of a straight-chain alkane bonding to each other.
These two carbon atoms could then only bond to two hydrogen atoms each, not three as in the
straight-chain alkane. Cyclohexane, is an example (Figure 15.2). Note that a cycloalkane does
not follow the general alkane formula,


 
Figure 15.1: Crude oil is extracted from porous seams of rock found beneath an impervious layer of rock within the


Earth’s crust.


 
H H H H H H



H—C—C—C—C—C—C—H
| |
H H H H H H


skeletal formula

displayed formula of hexane of hexane



H~
skeletal formula


of cyclohexane
displayed formula


of cyclohexane


Figure 15.2: Hexane and cyclohexane


 
The crude oil is brought to the surface at oil wells and transported to an oil refinery. The actual


composition of crude oil varies in different oilfields around the world.
At the refinery, the crude oil is processed into useful fuels. The first step is fractional distillation of the
oil. This separates the wide range of different hydrocarbons into fractions. The hydrocarbons in each


fraction will have similar boiling points. This is carried out in tall fractionating columns.
The oil-based compounds that are in high demand are the gasoline fraction (providing petrol) and the
naphtha fraction (providing the starting compounds for making many other chemicals in industry).


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
As you know, the supplies of crude oil are a finite resource and they are rapidly running out. One way
to conserve the oil we have left is to switch from petrol and diesel cars to electric cars. Discuss the
difficulties in making the switch to electric vehicles, as well as the benefits it will bring. Then feedback

your main points to the rest of your group.



15.1 The homologous group of alkanes
The majority of compounds found in the mixture of hydrocarbons we call crude oil are alkanes. We met the
first ten members of this homologous series in Table 14.2. The general formula for the alkanes is


For example, the molecular formula of pentane, in which n = 5, is (Figure 15.3).


H H H H H
displayed formula


| of pentane


formula
skeletal formula


of pentane


Figure 15.3: Three different ways of representing pentane molecules.


 
Note that all the carbon-carbon bonds are single covalent bonds. The carbon atoms all display sp?
hybridisation (see Section 4.5). This means that alkanes have the maximum number of hydrogen atoms in


their molecules, and are known as saturated hydrocarbons (Figure 15.4).
3D displayed formula


of pentane,



O =H
Figure 15.4: The 3D displayed formula shows the tetrahedral arrangement of atoms around each carbon atom


(approximate bond angles of 109.52).


 


 


Question
a_ is a straight-chain alkane whose molecules contain 20 carbon atoms.
i What is the molecular formula of eicosane?
ii the skeletal formula of eicosane.
the displayed formula and the skeletal formula of cyclopentane.


What is the general formula of cycloalkanes?


Give two differences between a molecule of cyclopentane and a molecule of pentane.


15.2 Reactions of alkanes
The alkanes are generally unreactive compounds. We can explain this by the very small difference in
electronegativity between carbon and hydrogen. Their atoms share the pair of electrons in the single
covalent bonds almost equally. Therefore, alkane molecules are non-polar, so they are not attacked by
nucleophiles or electrophiles (Figure 15.5). They have no partial positive charges (5+) on any of their
carbon atoms to attract nucleophiles, neither do they have areas of high electron density to attract


electrophiles (see Section 14.7).
However, the alkanes do react with oxygen in combustion reactions and also undergo substitution by


halogens in sunlight. These reactions are covered in the following sections.


 
Figure 15.5: Non-polar alkanes do not react with polar compounds such as water. The hexane is dyed with iodine to make
it coloured, so it is more clearly visible. The hexane and water in the test-tube are immiscible: they do not mix and they do


not react with each other.


 
Combustion of alkanes


Alkanes are often used as fuels (Figure 15.6). We burn them for many reasons:
to generate electricity in power stations,
to heat our homes and cook our food

to provide energy needed in industrial processes
to provide fuel for ships, aeroplanes, trains, lorries, buses, cars and motorbikes.


 


Figure 15.6: Alkanes are useful fuels.


 
If we burn an alkane in plenty of oxygen, the alkane will undergo complete combustion. All the carbon will


be oxidised fully to form carbon dioxide, and all the hydrogen will be oxidised to form water:
complete combustion


alkane + oxygen carbon dioxide + water
For example, octane is one of the alkanes in petrol that is burned inside the internal combustion engine in


motor vehicles. Some of the octane will undergo complete combustion in a car engine:
2CgHig + +
octane + oxygen carbon dioxide + water


The equation can also be written as:


+ 123 02 > +


Pollution from burning hydrocarbon fuels
When the petrol or diesel is mixed with air inside a car engine, there is only a limited supply of oxygen.
Under these conditions, not all the carbon in the hydrocarbon fuel is fully oxidised to carbon dioxide. Some
of the carbon is only partially oxidised to form carbon monoxide (CO) gas. This is called incomplete


combustion.
For example:


4
octane + oxygen combustion Carbon monoxide + water
or


+ 84 > 8CO +
Carbon monoxide is a toxic gas that bonds with the haemoglobin in your blood. The haemoglobin
molecules can then no longer bond to oxygen and so cannot transport oxygen around your body. Victims of
carbon monoxide poisoning will feel dizzy, then lose consciousness. If not removed from the toxic gas, the


victim will die.


Carbon monoxide is odourless, so this adds to the danger. This is why faulty gas heaters in which


incomplete combustion occurs can kill unsuspecting people in rooms with poor ventilation.
As well as releasing carbon monoxide, road traffic also releases acidic nitrogen oxides, mainly NO and
These contribute to the problem of acid rain (see Section 13.3). Acid rain can kill trees and aquatic animals
in lakes (Figure 15.7). Acid rain also erodes limestone buildings and statues, as well as corroding metals,


such as iron.


 


Figure 15.7: These trees have been badly damaged by acid rain.


 
In normal combustion, nitrogen gas in the air is not oxidised. However, in the very high temperatures in car
engines, oxidation of nitrogen does take place. A variety of nitrogen oxides can be formed and released in

the car’s exhaust fumes (Figure 15.8). For example:
+ 2NO(g)
2NO(g) + =


=



 
Figure 15.8: The vast numbers of cars on the roads pollute our atmosphere. Nitrogen oxides from traffic contribute to


photochemical smog, as well as acid rain.


 
As well as toxic carbon monoxide and acidic nitrogen oxides, cars also release unburnt hydrocarbons, often
referred to as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), into the air. Some of these are carcinogens (they cause


cancers) and can form PAN, a contributor to photochemical smog (see Section 13.3).

Reducing traffic emissions
Motor vehicles can now be fitted with catalytic converters in their exhaust systems (Figure 15.9). Once

warmed up, a catalytic converter can cause the following reactions to take place:

the oxidation of carbon monoxide to form carbon dioxide


the reduction of nitrogen oxides to form harmless nitrogen gas


e the oxidation of unburnt hydrocarbons to form carbon dioxide and water.
Unfortunately, catalytic converters can do nothing to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide (a greenhouse


gas) given off in the exhaust gases of cars and trucks.


 
Figure 15.9: Catalytic converters reduce the pollutants from car exhausts. Precious metals, such as platinum, are coated


on a honeycomb structure to provide a large surface area on which the reactions can occur.


 
The following equation describes the reaction between carbon monoxide and nitrogen monoxide. It takes


place on the surface of the precious metal catalyst in a catalytic converter:
2CO + 2NO > 2CO, +
Some of the carbon monoxide gas can also be oxidised inside the hot catalytic converter:
2CO +
Note that more carbon dioxide is released in the process of removing carbon monoxide. Carbon dioxide is
not a toxic gas, but it is still considered a pollutant because of its contribution to enhanced global warming,
resulting in climate change.
Question
2 Predict what would happen if octane was added to a solution of sodium hydroxide.
Explain your answer to part a.
the balanced symbol equations for:
the complete combustion of heptane, giving carbon dioxide and water
ii the incomplete combustion of methane, giving carbon monoxide and water
iii the incomplete combustion of nonane, giving carbon monoxide and water.
d i Name two pollutants from a car engine that can be oxidised in a catalytic converter.


ii Namea pollutant that is reduced in a catalytic converter.
Which pollutant from a car engine is not reduced by the use of a catalytic converter? What

environmental problem does this pollutant contribute to?
Now swap your answers with another learner and compare your responses. Discuss any differences,
and arrive at an agreed set of answers before looking up the correct answers online.


Substitution reactions of alkanes


The alkanes will undergo substitution reactions with halogens in sunlight.


Consider the reaction between ethane and chlorine in sunlight:


+ + HCl


ethane chloroethane
In this reaction, a hydrogen atom in the ethane molecule gets replaced by a chlorine atom. However, this
type of reaction does not take place in darkness (Figure 15.10). So what role does the sunlight play in the


mechanism of this substitution reaction?


Initiation step
The first step in the mechanism is the breaking of the CI-Cl bond by energy from ultraviolet light in


sunlight. This is called the initiation step in the mechanism:


Cl,


hexane + bromine
   
 


 
    


 
mix and
leave in


sunlight
mix and place
in a dark


cupboard
reaction to give a no reaction
mixture of bromohexanes


— bromine colour disappears
Figure 15.10: A substitution reaction takes place between alkanes and bromine in sunlight, but there is no reaction in


darkness.


 
As the CI-Cl bond breaks, each chlorine atom takes one electron from the pair of electrons in the CI-Cl
bond. This is an example of homolytic fission of a covalent bond (see Section 14.7). Two Cl atoms are


formed. These Cl atoms, each with an unpaired electron, are called free radicals.


Propagation steps


Free radicals are very reactive. They will attack the normally unreactive alkanes. A chlorine free radical will
attack the ethane molecule:


CH3CH3 + + HCl
In this propagation step, a C-H bond in CH3CH3 breaks homolytically. An ethyl free radical, is
produced. This can then attack a chlorine molecule, forming chloroethane and regenerating a chlorine free


radical:


+ + Cl-
Then the first propagation step can be repeated as the chlorine free radical can attack another ethane


molecule. This forms the ethyl free radical, which regenerates another chlorine free radical, and so on.
The word ‘propagation’ usually refers to growing new plants. In this mechanism the substitution reaction


progresses (grows) in a type of chain reaction.
This reaction is not really suitable for preparing specific halogenoalkanes, because we get a mixture of
substitution products. In the reaction between ethane and chlorine, the products can include many
different chloroalkanes. These can include 1,1-dichloroethane, 1,1,1 trichloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethane,
1,1,2-trichloroethane, 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane, and so on, as well as chloroethane. If there is enough
chlorine present, we eventually get hexachloroethane This variety of chloroalkane products results


from propagation steps in which a chlorine free radical attacks a chloroalkane already formed.


For example:
+ +
This can then be followed by:


-CH,CH,Cl + Cl, CICH,CH,Cl + Cl-


1,2—dichloroethane
The more chlorine gas in the reaction mixture to start with, the greater the proportions of chlorine atoms in


the chloroalkane molecules formed.

Termination steps
Whenever two free radicals meet they will react with each other. A single molecule is the only product. As
no free radicals are made that can carry on the reaction sequence, the chain reaction stops. Examples of

termination steps include:


+ -Cl >


+


(butane,


IMPORTANT


In the initiation step, we start with a molecule and get two free radicals formed.
In each propagation step, we start with a molecule and a free radical and get a different molecule


and a different free radical formed.
In the termination steps, we start with two free radicals and end up with a molecule and no free


radicals.


 
Overall, the reaction between alkanes and halogens, involving initiation, propagation and termination
steps, is called free-radical substitution.
Question
3 Bromine can react with ethane to form bromoethane.
conditions are needed for the reaction between ethane and bromine to take place?
do we call this type of reaction?

an equation to show the reaction of ethane and bromine to form bromoethane.
Why is this reaction not a good way to prepare a pure sample of bromoethane?



e i Name the three steps in the mechanism of this reaction.


ii Write an equation to show the first step in the mechanism.


What type of bond breaking does this first step involve?


REFLECTION


At this point, reflect on your work done studying the ‘alkanes’. Make a two-column table to record


‘New things | know about the alkanes’ / ‘New things that do not really understand yet’.
Discuss your table with a fellow learner and explain to each other exactly where your problems lie.


If you can’t sort out any of your difficulties together, ask your teacher to help.


 


15.3 The alkenes
We have looked at the nature of the double bond found in the hydrocarbons called in Section 14.4.
Alkenes with one double bond per molecule have the general formula One example is ethene,
Whereas alkanes, which contain only single bonds, are described as saturated hydrocarbons, we describe


alkenes as unsaturated hydrocarbons.
Oil refineries provide useful alkenes for the chemical industry. In the introduction to this chapter, we saw
how crude oil is separated into fractions at a refinery. Oil companies find that the demand for each fraction
differs. The lighter fractions, such as the gasoline fraction, are in high demand. So, chemical engineers
convert some of the excess heavier fractions into lighter hydrocarbons. The large, less useful hydrocarbon


molecules are broken down into smaller, more useful molecules. The process is called cracking.
The larger hydrocarbon molecules are fed into a steel chamber that contains no oxygen, so combustion
does not take place. The larger hydrocarbon molecules are heated to a high temperature and are passed

over an aluminium oxide, catalyst (Figure 15.11).



 
Figure 15.11: a A catalytic cracker occupies the bulk of the central part of this view of an oil refinery. b A computer


graphic showing a catalyst used to crack hydrocarbons.


 
When large alkane molecules are cracked, they form smaller alkane molecules and alkene molecules. One


possible example of a cracking reaction is:
+


+
The low-molecular mass alkanes formed in this example) make very useful fuels and are in high
demand. However, the alkenes produced in this example) are also very useful. They are more
reactive than the alkanes because of their double bonds. This makes them useful for the chemical industry
as the starting compounds (feedstock) for making many new products. These include most plastics (see


Section 15.5).


As well as the cracking of alkanes, alkenes can also be made by:
elimination of a hydrogen halide (e.g. HCI) from a halogenoalkane by heating with ethanolic sodium


hydroxide (see Section 16.4)
dehydration of an alcohol by using a heated catalyst (e.g. aluminium oxide, or a concentrated


acid (see Section 17.3).

Dehydration is the elimination of a water molecule from a reactant molecule.


Question
4 first member of the homologous series of alkenes.
the molecular formula of the alkene containing 18 carbon atoms and one C=C bond.
at the equation for cracking given in the text. Write a word equation for this reaction.


a balanced equation to show the cracking of nonane into heptane and ethene.
e and suggest why ‘Alkenes are more reactive than alkanes’. Think about whether


electrophiles or nucleophiles would attack alkenes and explain your choice.


Addition reactions of the alkenes
Most reactions of the alkenes are examples of addition reactions. In these reactions one of the two bonds in
the carbon-carbon (C=C) double bond is broken and a new single bond is formed from each of the two


carbon atoms.


The general addition reactions are shown in Figure 15.12.

||


c=C + —c—c—


/ \ ||
Figure 15.12: General equations for addition reactions of the alkenes: a with a hydrogen halide, such as hydrogen


bromide, and b with a halogen, such as chlorine.


 


Addition of hydrogen,
When hydrogen gas and an alkene are heated and passed over a finely divided platinum / nickel catalyst,


the addition reaction produces an alkane:


Pt /
+


ethane
ethane
The addition reaction of alkenes with hydrogen is called hydrogenation, and is used in the manufacture of


margarine (Figure 15.13).


 
Figure 15.13: Unsaturated oils, such as sunflower oil, contain hydrocarbon chains with several carbon-carbon double
bonds. These oils become partially saturated by reacting them with hydrogen, straightening their hydrocarbon chains. This


raises the melting points of the oils, changing them from liquids to soft solids that can be spread easily.

 
Addition of hydrogen halides, HX(aq)



When an alkene is bubbled through a concentrated solution of a hydrogen halide (either HF, HCI, HBr or HI)


at room temperature, the product is a halogenoalkane. For example:


CH,=CH, + HBr —
ethene bromoethane
With longer, asymmetric alkenes there are always two possible products that could be formed.


For example, with propene:


+ HBr >


propene 1—bromopropane


and


 


CH;CH=CH, + HBr


propene


IMPORTANT
Where two addition products are possible, the major product is the one that has the halogen atom


bonded to the C=C carbon atom with the highest number of alkyl groups bonded to it.


 
In the two reactions of propene with HBr shown, the Br bonds to the central C atom to form the major
product. The central C atom has two alkyl (methyl) groups bonded to it compared with the single alkyl


(ethyl) group on the end C atom. Therefore, CH3CHBrCH3 is the major product.
We can explain why this happens by thinking back to the stability of the carbocations discussed in Section
14.7. Remember that each alkyl group tends to donate electrons along its bond to the positively charged


carbon atom in the carbocation. The is formed from a secondary carbocation intermediate,
In Section 14.7 we saw that a secondary carbocation is more stable than a primary


carbocation, in this case This is because the positive charge becomes less concentrated by
the inductive effect of two alkyl groups rather than just one alkyl group. Therefore, the secondary


carbocation intermediate is more readily formed in the course of the addition reaction.
The mechanism of electrophilic addition that follows shows how:


acarbocation forms


which is then attacked by a negative ion


to give the final product of the addition reaction.
+

Ge H Br H
| secondary carbocation



forms and is attacked


by the 2-bromopropane


Figure 15.14: The mechanism for the electrophilic addition of HBr to propene.


 


Addition of steam,
Scientists in industry use the addition of steam to alkenes to make alcohols. They react steam and the
gaseous alkene at a high temperature and pressure, in the presence of concentrated phosphoric acid,
as the catalyst. When the alkene is ethene, the product is ethanol (Figure 15.15). However, the


ethanol found in alcoholic drinks is always produced by the fermentation of glucose.
H OH



/


=C
H



conc.
phosphoric
acid


ethene + steam ethanol


Figure 15.15: The addition reaction between ethene and steam.


 


Addition of halogens,
If we bubble an alkene through a solution of chlorine or bromine at room temperature, we again get an
addition reaction. The colour of the halogen molecules in solution is removed in the course of the reaction


(Figures 15.16 and 15.17).


H H H

+ Brno


H H Br Br


ethene + bromine ——>1,2-dibromoethane

Figure 15.16: The reaction between ethene and bromine.




The reactant is a very pale green solution, called chlorine water. Bromine water, Br2(aq), is orange


or yellow, depending on the concentration of bromine water.
Bromine water is used to test for the presence of the C=C bond in compounds. The compound to be tested


is shaken with bromine water. If it is unsaturated, the bromine water will be decolorised.


 


Figure 15.17: The addition reaction used to test for an unsaturated compound.


 


The mechanism of electrophilic addition to alkenes
In Section 14.4 we saw how the double bond in ethene is formed from a o (sigma) bond and a (pi) bond.
There are four electrons in total in this double bond. So although ethene is a non-polar molecule, there is
an area of high electron density around the C=C bond. This makes the alkenes open to attack by


electrophiles (see Section 14.7).
Remember that an electrophile is an acceptor of a pair of electrons. HBr is a polar molecule because of the
difference in electronegativity between the H atom and the Br atom. In a molecule of HBr, the H atom


carries a partial positive charge and the Br atom carries a partial negative charge.
In the mechanism of addition, the H atom acts as the electrophile, accepting a pair of electrons from the


C=C bond in the alkene. Look back to Figure 15.14.
But how can a non-polar molecule such as act as an electrophile? As the bromine molecule and ethene
molecules approach each other, the area of high electron density around the C=C bond repels the pair of
electrons in the bond away from the nearer Br atom. This makes the nearer Br atom slightly positive


and the further Br atom slightly negative. Figure 15.18 shows the mechanism of electrophilic addition.


carbocation


H H H H
\ /
C=C — H—C—C—H — H—C—C—H
/ \ |
H H Br Br Br



Figure 15.18: The mechanism of the electrophilic addition of bromine to ethene.


 
As the new bond between the C and Br atom forms, the Br—Br bond breaks heterolytically (see Section
14.7). The ion formed then attacks the highly reactive carbocation intermediate. So, one bromine atom


bonds to each carbon atom, producing 1,2-dibromoethane.
Question
5 State the general conditions used in the reaction between an alkene and hydrogen.


b the product formed when propene reacts with chlorine.


c Ethanol can be used as a solvent.


How is this ethanol made in industry?
will be formed when ethene gas is bubbled through a concentrated solution of hydrochloric


acid?
e the term electrophile.

f Explain how a chlorine molecule can act as an electrophile in its reaction with an alkene.
Discuss and then draw the mechanism for the reaction between ethene and chlorine.


15.4 Oxidation of the alkenes
Alkenes can be oxidised by acidified potassium manganate(VIl) solution, KMnO,(aq), which is a powerful
oxidising agent. The products formed will depend on the conditions chosen for the reaction. In Figure 15.18,


the R, and R? are alkyl groups.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 15.1


Cold dilute acidified manganate(VII) solution
If an alkene is shaken with a dilute solution of acidified potassium at room
temperature, the pale purple solution turns colourless. The alkene is converted into a diol, i.e. a


compound with two alcohol groups:


OH OH
+ [0] H—C—C—H
|
H


ethene ethane-1,2-diol
This reaction can be used as a test to find out whether a compound is unsaturated. However, the


decolourisation of bromine water is a more commonly used test (see Section 15.3).


 


Hot concentrated acidified solution,
Under these harsher conditions, the C=C double bond in the alkene is broken completely. The O-H groups
in the diol formed initially are further oxidised to ketones, aldehydes, carboxylic acids or carbon dioxide


gas. The actual products depend on what is bonded to the carbon atoms in the C=C double bond.
Figure 15.19 shows the oxidation products from each type of group bonded to a carbon atom in the C=C


bond.


CO +


carbon dioxide


an aldehyde


further oxidation
R—C
\


OH


a carboxylic acid


R!


a ketone


Figure 15.19: Oxidation of alkenes with hot, concentrated potassium solution,


 
To see what is formed when we heat 2-methylprop-1-ene with hot, concentrated acidified look


at equations 1 and 3 in Figure 15.19. The actual oxidation can be represented as:


 


 


 


+ + + CO, +


2—methylpropene propanone (a ketone)
We can use this reaction to determine the position of the double bond in larger alkenes. To do this we
would need to identify the products of the oxidation reaction and work backwards to deduce the original


alkene.
If, for example, carbon dioxide is given off in the oxidation, this tells us that the double bond was between


the end two carbon atoms in the alkene.
We can summarise the oxidations under harsh conditions (using a hot, concentrated solution of potassium


in three reactions.
atom is bonded to two hydrogen atoms, we get oxidation to a molecule.

+
If acarbon atom is bonded to one hydrogen atom and one alkyl group, we get oxidation to a COOH
(carboxylic acid) group.



RHC=CHR RCHO + RCHO RCOOH + RCOOH


If acarbon atom is bonded to two alkyl groups, we get oxidation to a C=O (ketone) group.


+


Question
6 Draw the displayed formula of the organic product formed when propene is oxidised by a cold


solution of acidified potassium


Name the compound.
the displayed formula of the organic product formed when but-2-ene is oxidised by a cold


solution of acidified potassium manganate(VIl).
Name the compound.
c Methylbut-2-ene is heated with concentrated acidified potassium manganate(VIl) solution.


i Draw the displayed formulae of the products and name them.
ii Write a balanced chemical equation for this reaction, using [O] to show oxygen atoms


involved.
Compare your answers to Question 6 with another learner. Use your combined answers to create a


mark scheme showing where each mark could be awarded.


15.5 Addition polymerisation
Probably the most important addition reaction of the alkenes forms the basis of much of the plastics
industry. Molecules of ethene, as well as other unsaturated compounds, can react with each other under


the right conditions to form polymer molecules.
A polymer is a long-chain molecule made up of many repeating units. The small, reactive molecules that
react together to make the polymer are called monomers. Up to 10 000 ethene monomers can bond


together to form the polymer chains of poly(ethene). Poly(ethene) is commonly used to make carrier bags.


We can show the polymerisation reaction of ethene as:

ethene


or by using the displayed formulae:
H H
\ /

7 1 |


H H H H Jn


nis very large, e.g. up to 10000


The section of the polymer shown in the brackets is the repeat unit of the polymer.
The reaction is called addition polymerisation. As in other addition reactions of the alkenes, it involves


the breaking of the bond in each C=C bond. Then the monomers link together.
Other alkenes and substituted alkenes also polymerise to make polymers with different properties.


Examples of other poly(alkenes) include poly(propene) and poly(chloroethene).
We can show the polymerisation of propene as:


nC3Hg >


or, using structural formulae:
) +


poly(propene)
The polymer chain has (—CH3) groups sticking out from the carbon skeleton of the poly(propene).


We can show this as in Figure 15.20.

| |


H H H H H H H H H H


Figure 15.20: This shows a regular arrangement of the groups along the poly(propene) polymer chain.
CH3H CH3H
| | |


| | |



|

 
We can also represent the polymer by showing part of its structure using a 3D displayed formula, as shown
in Figure 15.21.


Figure 15.21: A 3D displayed formula of a small section of the poly(propene) molecule.

 


Question
7 one of the following statements is correct?
Discuss all the options with a partner, and explain why each is either correct or incorrect.
and poly(ethene) will both decolorise bromine water.
is a saturated hydrocarbon.
will melt at a lower temperature than propene.


D


The polymerisation of ethene is an example of an electrophilic substitution reaction.
More about addition polymers


We can also use substituted alkenes, such as chloroethene, as monomers:


nH,C=CHCl


poly
The section of the polymer chain is the called the repeat unit of poly(chloroethene)


(Figure 15.22).


 
Figure 15.22: A 3D displayed formula of a small section of the poly(chloroethene) molecule. Its common name is PVC, as


the old name for chloroethene was vinyl chloride.


 
In poly(alkenes) and substituted poly(alkenes) made of one type of monomer, the repeat unit is the same


as the monomer except that the C=C double bond is changed to a C-C single bond.
Notice that, as in any other addition reaction of the alkenes, addition polymerisation yields only one


product.


IMPORTANT


Remember that:
the section of the polymer chain shown inside the square brackets by its structural or displayed


formula is called its repeat unit


addition polymerisation is characterised by:
monomers which are unsaturated, e.g. contain a C=C double bond


e the polymer being the only product of the reaction.


 


Disposal of poly(alkene) plastics
Plastics are widely used in many aspects of everyday life. However, the large-scale use of poly(alkene)s
has created a problem when we come to dispose of them. During their life, one of the most useful


properties of poly(alkene)s is their lack of reactivity.
As poly(alkene)s are effectively huge alkane molecules, they are resistant to chemical attack. So they can
take hundreds of years to decompose when dumped in landfill sites, taking up valuable space. They are
non-biodegradable. Therefore, throwing away poly(alkenes) creates rubbish that will pollute the


environment for centuries (Figure 15.23).


 


Figure 15.23: A beach littered with poly(alkene) plastic waste.


 


Burning plastic waste
One way to solve this problem would be to burn the poly(alkene)s and use the energy released to generate
electricity. As we have seen in Section 15.2, if hydrocarbons burn in excess oxygen, the products are
carbon dioxide and water. This solution would not help combat global warming, but would help to conserve
our supplies of fossil fuels that currently generate most of our electricity. However, we have also seen that

toxic carbon monoxide is produced from the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons.
Another problem is the difficulty recycling companies have in separating other plastic waste from the
poly(alkene)s. This happens when objects have just been thrown away and not been sorted according to
their recycling code. Also, if poly(chloroethene) waste is burnt, acidic hydrogen chloride gas will be given



off, as well as toxic compounds called dioxins. Acidic gases should be neutralised before releasing the
waste gases into the atmosphere. Very high temperatures should be used in incinerators to break down


any toxins.


15.6 Tackling questions on addition polymers
In your exam, you might be asked to:


the repeat unit of a polymer obtained from a given unsaturated monomer


identify the monomer(s) present in a given section of a polymer molecule.
Deducing the repeat unit of an addition polymer for given


monomer(s)
If you are given a monomer with a C=C double bond, simply turn the double bond into a single bond


and show the bonds either side of the two C atoms that would continue the chain:


 
addition cl H
polymerisation | |
nc=C
| |
H H H
n


monomer repeat unit
Identifying the monomer(s) present in a given section of an
addition polymer molecule


First of all, you should split the polymer chain into its repeat units.


With an addition polymer, you then need to put the C=C double bond back into the monomer:


part of addition polymer
H H
| |
c=C

H H H H
n


repeat unit monomer


Question
Tetrafluoroethene, is the monomer for the polymer PTFE, which is used in the non-stick coating

on pans.
State what PTFE stands for.



b the name of the type of reaction used to form PTFE.
c a chemical equation to show the formation of PTFE from


Draw the structure of the repeat unit in PTFE.


e How could poly(alkene) waste be used to conserve fossil fuels?
f would your answer to part e add to the problem of enhanced global warming?
batch of poly(ethene) pellets was burnt in an inefficient industrial incinerator.


h toxic gas that would be released.


Name the monomer used to make this polymer:


 


REFLECTION


Working as a pair, each write a question and its mark scheme. One of you should devise an
assessment of the free-radical substitution of an alkane, while the other assesses the electrophilic
addition to an alkene. You can use the Exam-style Questions in this coursebook to help with the
style of your question and on-line answers to write a typical mark scheme. However, your question


and answers should be your own work.
Then try to answer each other’s questions, giving your answers back for your partner to mark


using their mark scheme.
Use this exercise to give you an idea of your understanding of the key reactions of alkanes and


alkenes. What have you learned from the activity?


 


SUMMARY


Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons with the general formula
Alkanes are relatively unreactive as they are non-polar. Most reagents are polar and do not usually react with non-


polar molecules.
Alkanes are widely used as fuels. When they burn completely they produce carbon dioxide and water. However,


they produce toxic carbon monoxide gas when they burn in a limited supply of oxygen, e.g. in a car engine.
Cracking of the less useful fractions from the fractional distillation of crude oil produces a range of more useful


alkanes with lower molecular masses, as well as alkenes.
Chlorine atoms or bromine atoms can substitute for hydrogen atoms in alkanes in the presence of ultraviolet light,
producing halogenoalkanes. This is called a free-radical substitution reaction. The CI-Cl or bond undergoes
homolytic fission in ultraviolet light, producing reactive Cl: or Br: free radicals. This initiation step is followed by
propagation steps involving a chain reaction which regenerates the halogen free radicals. Termination steps occur,


when two free radicals combine.
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons with one carbon-carbon double bond consisting of a o bond and bond.


Their general formula is
Alkenes are more reactive than alkanes because they contain a m bond. The characteristic reaction of the alkenes is
addition, which occurs across the m bond:
ethene produces ethane when heated with hydrogen gas over a platinum / nickel catalyst: this is called
hydrogenation
ethene produces 1,2-dibromoethane when reacted with bromine water at room temperature
ethene produces chloroethane when reacted with hydrogen chloride gas at room temperature


ethene produces ethanol when reacted with steam, in the presence of concentrated catalyst.
The mechanism of the reaction of bromine with ethene is electrophilic addition. Electrophiles accept a pair of
electrons from an electron-rich atom or centre, in this case the m bond. A carbocation intermediate is formed after


the addition of the first bromine atom. This rapidly reacts with a bromide ion to form 1,2-dibromoethane.
Mild oxidation of alkenes by cold, dilute acidified solution gives a diol. However, a hot, concentrated
acidified solution will break the C=C bond and give two oxidation products. Identifying the two


products formed will indicate the position of the C=C bond in the original alkene.
Alkenes produce many useful polymers by addition polymerisation. For example, poly(ethene) is made from


and poly(chloroethene) is made from
The disposal of poly(alkene) plastic waste is difficult, as much of it is chemically inert and non-biodegradable. When

burnt, waste plastics may produce toxic products, such as hydrogen chloride from PVC, poly(chloroethene).



 


 


3-ethylpentane and 2,3-dimethylbutane are alkanes.


each one give:
3
i its molecular formula
[3]
ii its structural formula
[3]
displayed formula
3
its skeletal formula.
1
Give the general formula that is used to represent alkanes.
Two of the alkanes in this question are isomers of each other. 12]
Identify which two and identify the type of isomerism they show.
2
terms from part a of this question, define isomers.
1
e Name the alkane whose structural formula is [Total:
2
2 Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons. Explain the words saturated and hydrocarbons.
2
are generally unreactive. Explain why this is so.
Write balanced symbol equations for the complete combustion of:
2
i methane
[2]


ii ethane. [Total: 8]


3 Use the passage below and your own knowledge to answer the questions that follow.
Methane reacts with bromine to give bromomethane and hydrogen bromide. The mechanism for
the reaction is called free-radical substitution and involves homolytic fission of chemical bonds. The


reaction proceeds via initiation, propagation and termination steps.

mechanism by which bromine reacts with methane.
2
b a balanced symbol equation for this reaction.
1
break in this reaction. What type of bond breaking is involved?
2
d_ Explain the essential conditions that are required for this reaction.
this reaction, write down an equation for:
[2]
i an initiation step
[2]
step
[2]
step. [Total: 12]
reaction to the one in Question 3, 1.50 g of ethane reacts with chlorine. 1.29 g of
chloroethane is formed. (A, values: H = 1.0, C = 12.0, Cl = 35.5)
Calculate:
2
number of moles of ethane that were used (2]
2
b number of moles of chloroethane that were formed
[2]
percentage yield
d number of grams of chloroethane that would have formed if the percentage yield [2]
had been 60.0%. [Total: 8]
cis-pent-2-ene and trans-pent-2-ene are alkenes.
each one give:
3
i its molecular formula
[3]
its structural formula
3
displayed formula
3
iv its skeletal formula.
1
Give the general formula that is used to represent alkenes.


Two of these alkenes are isomers of each other.


Identify which two.


why it is not possible to change one of these two isomers into the other at room [2]
temperature.
displayed formulae and the names of the four alkenes with molecular formula C4Hg.
f has two cis/trans isomers.
Draw and name the two isomers. [Total:
6 Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons. Explain the word unsaturated.
b Describe the bonding between the two carbon atoms in ethene.


[2]


c Describe and draw the shape of an ethene molecule, labelling all bond angles.
d_ the meaning of the term functional group. Which functional group is present in [2]


all alkenes?
e Describe a simple chemical test to determine whether an unknown hydrocarbon is


unsaturated.
2


Describe the result if the test is positive.


7 the passage below and your own knowledge to answer the questions that follow.
Ethene reacts with bromine to give 1,2-dibromoethane as the only product. The mechanism for the
reaction is electrophilic addition and involves heterolytic fission of chemical bonds. The bromine

molecules behave as electrophiles in this reaction.
the mechanism by which bromine reacts with ethene.
b a balanced symbol equation for this reaction.
c break in this reaction. Give the type of bond breaking involved.
the mechanism of the reaction as fully as you can, including curly arrows.


e substance behaves here as an electrophile? Explain what is meant by the term [2]


electrophile. [Total: 11]
reaction to the reaction described in Question 7, 2.80 g of ethene react with chlorine.


8.91 g of dichloroethane are formed. (A, values: H = 1.0, C = 12.0, Cl = 35.5)
Calculate:
[2]
number of moles of ethene that were used
2
b number of moles of dichloroethane that were formed


[2]


percentage yield
number of grams of dichloroethane that would have formed if the percentage yield [2]

had been 80.0%. [Total: 8]
This question is about the reactions of alkenes with hot, concentrated acidified potassium
manganate(VIl) solution.



Give two effects that a hot, concentrated solution of acidified potassium [2]
have on an alkene molecule.
1
ii how this reaction is useful to chemists.
is known to be either but-1-ene or but-2-ene. When heated with concentrated
acidified potassium solution, bubbles of carbon dioxide gas were given
off.
[1]
Name the alkene.
is heated with concentrated acidified potassium solution.
3
Draw the displayed formulae of the products and name them.
ii Write a balanced chemical equation for this reaction, using to show oxygen


atoms involved. [Total: 8]


SELF-EVALUATION
Almost Ready to

section... move on
explain the general unreactivity of alkanes, and describe their


complete and incomplete combustion
explain the free-radical substitution of alkanes by chlorine and


by bromine, as shown by their mechanism
suggest how cracking can be used to obtain more useful
alkanes, and alkenes, of lower relative molecular mass from


larger hydrocarbon molecules.
describe the environmental consequences of burning
hydrocarbon fuels in vehicles and the removal of pollutants by


catalytic converters
describe the reactions of alkenes as shown by their addition,


oxidation and polymerisation
describe the mechanism of electrophilic addition in alkenes,
and explain the inductive effects of alkyl groups on the


stability of cations formed


 

 



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


BEFORE YOU START

Which statement below describes what happens when a covalent bond breaks heterolytically?


When the bond breaks ...
A_ one of the atoms takes both the electrons in the bond, and becomes negatively charged
of the atoms takes both the electrons in the bond, and becomes positively charged
both atoms take one electron each from the bond, forming free radicals


D
both atoms take one electron each from the bond, with one atom becoming a free radical, and


the other a positive ion.
with a partner how substitution and elimination reactions differ. Write a sentence
explaining the difference. Then look back to Chapter 14 to illustrate your answer with two chemical


equations.


3 Describe the test and result to positively identify a bromide ion.


4 Working with a partner, define nucleophile.


 


USES OF HALOGENOALKANES
Halogenoalkanes are used in many industrial chemical processes. Halogenoalkanes are formed from
elements such as fluorine and chlorine but, unlike these elements, many halogenoalkanes are
relatively unreactive under normal conditions. This leads to their use as flame retardants and


anaesthetics.
You might have heard of one of the first anaesthetics, chloroform. Its systematic name is
trichloromethane (CHCI3). Nowadays, if you require an anaesthetic, you may receive a gas known as


‘halothane’. Its systematic name is 2-bromo-2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane.
F cl
F—C—C—Br




One of the essential properties of an anaesthetic (Figure 16.1) is chemical inertness (lack of reactivity),
and each halothane molecule contains three very strong bonds that are difficult to break. This


makes halothane inert (very unreactive) and safe to use in the aqueous environment inside the body.


 

Figure 16.1: An anaesthetist putting a patient to sleep before an operation.




However, under other conditions, such as high in the Earth’s stratosphere, some halogenoalkanes


react in completely different ways.
CFCs are chlorofluorocarbons. Chemists refer to them as chlorofluoroalkanes. When scientists
developed these new compounds in the 1930s, people could see no drawbacks to using the new
‘wonder compounds’. They are all chemically inert. They are not flammable and are not toxic. These
properties made volatile CFCs useful as aerosol propellants, solvents and as the refrigerants inside


fridges. They were also used as blowing agents for polymers such as expanded polystyrene.
However, CFCs have caused a serious environmental issue. They have damaged the ozone layer in the
upper atmosphere. The ozone layer is a thin layer of gas that protects the Earth by absorbing harmful


UV radiation arriving from the Sun.
It turns out that CFCs are unreactive in normal conditions, but high up in the atmosphere they become
totally different. The CFCs can persist in the atmosphere for about a hundred years. The UV light from
the Sun breaks the bonds in the CFC molecules. This releases highly reactive chlorine atoms,
called chlorine free radicals. These chlorine free radicals react with ozone molecules. In a sequence of
chain reactions, chemists estimate that each chlorine free radical can destroy a million ozone


molecules.
Governments have been working on the problem, and most industrialised countries have now banned
the use of CFCs (Figure 16.2). Chemists developed new compounds for fridges and aerosols, such as
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs): for example, CH2FCF3. These non-chlorinated compounds break down
more quickly once released into the air because of the presence of hydrogen in their molecules. This
means that they never rise in the atmosphere as far as the ozone layer. There is now evidence that the


ozone layer is recovering from the effects of CFCs. The hole in the ozone layer is slowly closing up.


 


Figure 16.2: Banning the use of CFCs has meant that the hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica is now getting


smaller.


 
Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Discuss how the passage above about the use of halogenoalkanes demonstrates how some

scientific developments can have both good and bad effects on society and the environment.



16.1 Making halogenoalkanes
Very few halogenoalkanes are found in nature. Most are made in chemical reactions between other organic


compounds and a halogen or halide compound.
The main reactions are:
the free-radical substitution of alkanes by chlorine, Clz, or bromine, in ultraviolet light:


+ +


(For more details, see Section 15.2)
e the electrophilic addition of an alkene with a halogen, or a hydrogen halide, HX(g), at room


temperature:
+ Bry
(For more details, see Section 15.3)


substitution of an alcohol. For example, by reactions:
HX (or with KX and or to make HX),
+ HCI CH3CH2Cl + H20
e with and heat:
+ PCI; +
with at room temperature:
+ + HCI + POCI3
¢ or with
+ + +
The chloroethane made in the reactions above is classified as a primary halogenoalkane, as the chlorine is
bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to just one alkyl group (a methyl group in this case). We can also


make halogenoalkanes where the carbon atom adjacent to the halogen atom is bonded to two groups,
called secondary halogenoalkanes. Tertiary halogenoalkanes have three alkyl groups on the adjacent


carbon atom.


16.2 Nucleophilic substitution reactions
We can think of the halogenoalkanes as alkanes that have one or more hydrogen atoms replaced by


halogen atoms.
Remember that the halogens are the elements in Group 17 of the Periodic Table, namely fluorine (F),


chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) and iodine
The simplest halogenoalkanes, whose molecules contain just one halogen atom, will have the general
formula where X is F, Cl, Br or |. The halogen atom has a huge effect on the reactivity of the
halogenoalkanes compared with that of the alkanes. The halogenoalkanes are more reactive because of
the polar nature of the covalent bond between the carbon and halogen atom unlike the non-polar bonds in
alkane molecules. The carbon bonded to the halogen carries a partial positive charge, and the halogen a


partial negative charge.


Substitution reactions with aqueous alkali,
When an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide is heated with a halogenoalkane, a nucleophilic
substitution reaction takes place. The halogen atom in the halogenoalkane is replaced by an


hydroxyl! group, so the organic product formed is an alcohol:


CH;CH,Br + NaOH — CH;CH,OH + NaBr
bromoethane ethanol
We can also show this equation as:


CH3CH2Br + +
The aqueous hydroxide ion behaves as a nucleophile here, because it is donating a pair of electrons to the
carbon atom bonded to the halogen in the halogenoalkane. This is why the reaction is called a nucleophilic


substitution.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 16.1


 


Hydrolysis of a halogenoalkane
The reaction is carried out under reflux in the laboratory. This lets us heat the reaction mixture without
evaporating off the volatile organic compounds in the reaction flask. The apparatus is shown in Figure

16.3.
Similar reactions occur with other halogenoalkanes, but the reaction rates differ. We can investigate
the rate of hydrolysis using aqueous silver nitrate solution. The water in the silver nitrate solution acts
as the nucleophile, and again an alcohol is formed. The reaction is called hydrolysis (meaning
‘breakdown by water’):


=» water out
water condenser
anti-bumping


granules
alkali


heat


Figure 16.3: Reflux apparatus for hydrolysis of a halogenoalkane.


 
+ + H* +


It is a very similar reaction to the reaction that takes place with aqueous alkali.
However, the hydrolysis with water occurs more slowly than with the hydroxide ion, This is
because the negatively charged hydroxide ion is a more effective nucleophile than a neutral water


molecule. This is due to the fact that, in water, the oxygen atom in H20 only carries partial negative


charge (5—), whereas in the hydroxide ion, OH~, the oxygen atom carries a full negative charge.
From the equation above, you can see that a halide ion, in this case the bromide ion, is produced


in the reaction.


 


In Section 12.3 we used silver nitrate solution to test for halide ions. Remember that:
aqueous chlorides give a white precipitate (silver chloride),


bromides give a cream precipitate (silver bromide)
iodides produce a pale yellow precipitate (silver iodide).


The water in the silver nitrate solution will hydrolyse the halogenoalkane.
Observing this reaction, we can time how long it takes for test-tubes containing the halogenoalkanes and


aqueous silver nitrate solution to become opaque.
Conclusion


We find that:


the fastest nucleophilic substitution reactions take place with the iodoalkanes


the slowest nucleophilic substitution reactions take place with the fluoroalkanes.
The substitution reaction involves the breaking of the carbon-halogen bond. The bond energies in Table


16.1 help us to explain the rates of reaction:


Table 16.1: Bond energy values of the carbon-halogen bonds.


 


 
Notice that the bond is the weakest, so it is broken most easily. When the bond breaks, it forms an |
jon during the substitution reaction. The bond breaks heterolytically, with the iodine atom taking both the


electrons in the bond.
This is shown clearly in an ionic equation:


CH3CH,OH + I


iodoethane ethanol


IMPORTANT


The trend in the reactivity of the halogenoalkanes is shown below:
Fluoroalkanes reactive


Chloroalkanes


Bromoalkanes


lodoalkanes most reactive


 


There is more about the mechanism of nucleophilic substitution in Section 16.3.


Substitution with cyanide ions, CN7 (in ethanol)
In this reaction the nucleophile is the cyanide, ion. To carry out the reaction, a solution of potassium
cyanide, KCN, in ethanol (known as an ethanolic solution of potassium cyanide) is made up. This is then


heated under reflux with the halogenoalkane.


An ionic equation for this reaction is:
CH;CH,Br+ CN” —
bromoethane propanenitrile
Notice that the reaction with the cyanide ion adds an extra carbon atom to the original halogenoalkane


carbon chain. In this case, bromoethane is converted to propanenitrile.
Sometimes in industry, chemists need to make a new compound with one more carbon atom than the best
available organic raw material (the starting compound). Therefore, if we can convert the starting
compound to a halogenoalkane, we can then reflux with ethanolic KCN to make a nitrile. We now have an


intermediate nitrile with the correct number of carbon atoms.
We will consider nitriles and their subsequent conversion to carboxylic acids and amines again in Chapter


18.


Substitution with ammonia, NH3 (in ethanol)
If we heat a halogenoalkane with an excess of ammonia dissolved in ethanol under pressure, an amine is


formed.

CH;CH,Br + NH; > + HBr
bromoethane ethylamine



Here the nucleophile is the ammonia, NH3, molecule. The organic product, ethylamine, is a primary amine,
as the nitrogen atom is attached to only one alkyl group. If the ammonia is not in excess, we get a mixture
of amine products. This is because the primary amine product will act as a nucleophile itself and will attack
halogenoalkane molecules, forming secondary amines, and so on. The secondary amine formed above


would be called diethylamine.


You can read more about amines in Chapter 27.
Question
Work with another learner to discuss and answer these questions:


reactants you would use to produce 1,2-dichloropropane.
Why does the hydrolysis of a halogenoalkane happen more quickly with ions than with


water molecules?
c why silver nitrate solution can be used to investigate the rate of hydrolysis of the


halogenoalkanes. Include ionic equations for the formation of the precipitates.


Why can ammonia and amine molecules act as nucleophiles?
e ammonia is reacted with an excess of a halogenoalkane, a mixture of amines can be


formed.
If we start with an excess of 1-bromopropane, give the structural formula and name of the tertiary


amine formed.
Compare your answers with those of another pair. Discuss and amend any errors you come across


together.
16.3 Mechanism of nucleophilic substitution in


halogenoalkanes
Many of the reactions of halogenoalkanes are nucleophilic substitutions. In these reactions, the nucleophile
attacks the carbon atom bonded to the halogen. Remember from Chapter 14 that nucleophiles are donors


of an electron pair, and are attracted to electron-deficient atoms.
The carbon-halogen bond is polarised because the halogen is more electronegative than carbon. So the
halogen draws the pair of electrons in the bond away from the carbon atom, nearer to itself. Therefore, the


carbon atom carries a positive charge (shown in Figure 16.4).
H



H


Figure 16.4: The carbon-halogen bond is polarised.


 


The halogen atom is replaced by the nucleophile in the substitution reaction.
There are two possible mechanisms that can operate in the nucleophilic substitution reactions of


halogenoalkanes. The actual mechanism is determined by the structure of the halogenoalkane involved in


the reaction.


Mechanism for primary halogenoalkanes (Sy2)
In primary halogenoalkanes containing one halogen atom, the halogen atom is bonded to a carbon atom,
which is itself bonded to one other carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms. This means that the carbon
atom bonded to the halogen is attached to only one alkyl group. For example, 1-chloropropane,


is a primary halogenoalkane. In this case, the carbon atom bonded to the chlorine atom is


attached to one alkyl group, an ethyl group.
In Section 16.2 we looked at the hydrolysis of bromoethane, another primary halogenoalkane. Figure 16.5


shows the mechanism for that reaction.


 


 
HO. H H
lst | | | |
H—C—C—H > H—C—C—H > H—C—C—H
| |
Br H OH H


+
intermediate as
C—OH forms and


C—Br breaks


Figure 16.5: The mechanism of nucleophilic substitution in a primary halogenoalkane.


 
The ion donates a pair of electrons to the 6+ carbon atom, forming a new covalent bond. At the same
time, the bond is breaking. The Br atom takes both the electrons in the bond. This is an example of

heterolytic fission of a covalent bond (see Section 14.7). The Br atom leaves the halogenoalkane as a Br




This mechanism is called an Sy2 mechanism. The ‘S’ stands for substitution and the ‘N’ stands for
nucleophilic. The ‘2’ tells us that the rate of the reaction, which is determined by the slow step in the
mechanism (see Section 22.1), involves two reacting species. Experiments show us that the rate depends


on both the concentration of the halogenoalkane and the concentration of the hydroxide ions present.


Mechanism for tertiary halogenoalkanes (Sy1)
In a tertiary halogenoalkane, the carbon atom bonded to the halogen atom is also bonded to three other
carbon atoms (alkyl groups). For example, 2-bromo-2-methylpropane is a tertiary halogenoalkane. The
carbon atom bonded to the bromine atom is attached to three alkyl groups, all groups. The


structure of this tertiary halogenoalkane is shown in Figure 16.6.
H
|
H—C—H
H H
| |
H—C—C—C—H
|


H Br H


Figure 16.6: A tertiary halogenoalkane, 2-bromo-2-methylpropane.


 
A tertiary halogenoalkane reacts with a hydroxide ion by a two-step mechanism. The first step in the
mechanism is the breaking of the carbon-halogen bond. This forms a tertiary carbocation (see Section


14.7). Then the tertiary carbocation is attacked immediately by the hydroxide ion (Figure 16.7).


CH; CH; CH;
| |



| | |


+ Bro +


Figure 16.7: The mechanism of nucleophilic substitution in a tertiary halogenoalkane.


 


This mechanism is known as an mechanism. The ‘1’ tells us that the rate of the reaction only
depends on one reagent, in this case the concentration of the halogenoalkane, as shown in the first (slow)


step of the mechanism.


Once again, this breaking of the C—Br bond is an example of heterolytic fission.
The ion forms again, as in the Sy2 mechanism, but in this mechanism a carbocation ion forms. This
does not happen with primary halogenoalkanes. This is because tertiary carbocations are more stable than
primary carbocations. This is due to the positive inductive effect of the alkyl groups attached to the
carbon atom bonded to the halogen (see Section 14.5). Alkyl groups tend to release electrons to atoms
attached to them. So a tertiary carbocation has three alkyl groups donating electrons towards the
positively charged carbon atom, reducing its charge density. This makes it more stable than a primary


carbocation, which just has one alkyl group releasing electrons (Figure 16.8).
H H H H H
| | 4 | |


H H H H H H H H
H—C—H
|
H
primary carbocation secondary carbocation tertiary carbocation


(least stable) (most stable)


Figure 16.8: The trend in the stability of primary, secondary and tertiary carbocations.


 
The mechanism and the Sy2 mechanism are both likely to play a part in the nucleophilic substitution of


secondary halogenoalkanes.


Question
2 Show the mechanism, including appropriate curly arrows, for the hydrolysis of 1-chloropropane,


by alkali.
Explain what is happening in this mechanism to another learner.

the structure (displayed formula) of 2-chloro-2-methylbutane.
Show the mechanism for the hydrolysis of 2-chloro-2-methylbutane by an alkali.


16.4 Elimination reactions
Halogenoalkanes also undergo elimination reactions. An elimination reaction involves the loss of a small
molecule from the original organic molecule. In the case of halogenoalkanes, this small molecule is a


hydrogen halide, such as or HBr.
The reagent used in these elimination reactions is ethanolic sodium hydroxide, heated with the


halogenoalkane:


CH;CH,Br + NaOH(ethanol) CH,=CH, + H,O + NaBr


bromoethane ethene
The original bromoethane molecule has lost an H atom and a Br atom. We can think of it as HBr being
eliminated from the halogenoalkane. The ethanolic ion acts as a base, accepting an Ht ion from the


halogenoalkane to form water.


The C-Br bond breaks heterolytically, forming a Br~ ion and leaving an alkene as the organic product.


Notice the importance of the conditions used in organic reactions:


IMPORTANT


If we use NaOH(ethanol), an elimination reaction occurs and an alkene is one of the products.


but


If we use NaOH(aq), a nucleophilic substitution reaction occurs and an alcohol is one of the products.


 
Question
3 Write a balanced equation for the reaction of 2-bromopropane with ethanolic sodium hydroxide.


b the organic product.
with a partner another elimination reaction with a different bromoalkane that would give


the same products as in part a.


Write a balanced equation for this reaction.


REFLECTION
Show the mechanism for the hydrolysis of 1-chlorobutane by an aqueous alkali, such as sodium


hydroxide solution,


Work as a pair:


e listen to your partner explain this mechanism to you
assess each other’s understanding of the Sy2 and mechanisms for the hydrolysis of primary


and tertiary halogenoalkanes.
Reflect together on all the knowledge you need to understand and explain the mechanisms of the
hydrolysis of a primary halogenoalkane and a tertiary halogenoalkane by an alkali. Make a list of


the essential knowledge to answer an exam question on Sy2 and Syl mechanisms.


SUMMARY
If one or more of the hydrogen atoms in an alkane molecule are replaced by halogen atoms, the compound is called


a halogenoalkane.
lodoalkanes are the most reactive halogenoalkanes, whereas fluoroalkanes are the least reactive. We explain this by
the trend in the bond strength of the carbon.halogen bonds. The C-F bond is the strongest bond, and the bond

is the weakest bond. So the bond is most easily broken during its reactions.
Halogenoalkanes are attacked by nucleophiles. This happens because the carbon bonded to the halogen carries a
partial positive charge (5+), due to the higher electronegativity of the halogen. So halogenoalkanes can undergo


nucleophilic substitution.


Suitable nucleophiles include aqueous alkali, cyanide, CN~, and ammonia, NH3.


The reaction with ions (or with water) is known as hydrolysis, and an alcohol is formed as the organic product.
Halogenoalkanes will also undergo elimination reactions when heated with ethanolic sodium hydroxide, forming

alkenes as the organic product.



EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS.


 

type of reaction best describes the heating of chloroethane with ethanolic sodium hydroxide

solution?



elimination


[1]


Which one of the following is a tertiary halogenoalkane?


A


D
CHBr3



Which one of the following will form a carbocation in the mechanism of nucleophilic substitution?


A


c


D




CH3Br [1]
4 When a solution of potassium cyanide in ethanol is heated under reflux with 1-chloropropane, what


is the organic product of the reaction called?
A
B
c


D
butanenitrile
1-chloropropanenitrile


ethanenitrile


propanenitrile [1]


will undergo reactions when heated, as shown by reactions A and B.


f


g


CH3CH2CH2CH2OH
[2]
For reactions A and B, give the reagents used in each case.
Reaction A was repeated using 1-iodobutane instead of 1-bromobutane.
Explain any difference in the rate of reaction observed.
1
Name the type of organic reaction shown in A.
3
Draw the mechanism for reaction A.
Reaction A was repeated with 2-bromo-2-methylpropane instead of 1-bromobutane.
[1]
Name the organic compound formed.
ii The mechanism of the reaction with 2-bromo-2-methylpropane differs from the
mechanism of reaction A.
Describe how the mechanisms differ. [2]


[1]


Name the type of reaction shown in B.
If reaction B was repeated with 2-bromobutane, deduce the other organic products that [2]


can form as well as the product shown above. [Total: 14]
6 Bromochlorodifluoromethane has been used in fire extinguishers. However, its breakdown products


were found to be toxic.


b
1
Draw the displayed formula of bromochlorodifluoromethane.
is being introduced as a replacement for various CFCs in refrigerants and
aerosols.

[1]
Deduce the name of this compound. [Total: 2]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


sectio more work there move on
write equations for the main reactions that can produce 16.1

halogenoalkanes, to include the reagents and conditions used

write equations for the reactions of halogenoalkanes when

they undergo nucleophilic substitution, such as hydrolysis, the 16.2

formation of nitriles, and the formation of primary amines by

their reaction with ammonia

write equations for the reactions of halogenoalkanes when

they undergo elimination of a hydrogen halide by ethanolic 16.4

sodium hydroxide




16.3


nucleophilic substitution in halogenoalkanes


interpret the different reactivities of halogenoalkanes.


 


 


images


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START
Which statement below describes what happens to an organic compound when it is reduced and


then oxidised?
It loses hydrogen, then loses oxygen
It gains hydrogen, then gains oxygen


It gains hydrogen, then loses oxygen


It loses hydrogen, then gains oxygen

Discuss with a partner how to complete these general equations:

acid + base >

acid + metal >

acid + carbonate >
Give the skeletal formula for:

i propan-2-ol

butanone

ethanal

ethanoic acid.
Give the displayed formula for:


ethanoate


pentanenitrile.
Discuss with another learner what happens to an organic molecule during hydrolysis and


dehydration.


Discuss the theory to explain strong and weak acids.


MAKING ETHANOL AS A BIOFUEL


 
Ethanol, is the most widely used of the homologous series of alcohols. The sugar extracted
from crops such as sugar cane and sugar beet can be fermented with yeast to make ethanol (Figure
17.1). Ethanol is a ‘biofuel’ and burns with a clean flame. This process is becoming increasingly
important as our supplies of crude oil run out and cleaner, easier to produce biofuels are needed to


take the place of petrol and diesel.


 


Figure 17.1: The sugar extracted from sugar cane can be fermented with yeast to make ethanol.


 
The industrial production of ethanol uses ethene as a reactant. As you saw in the introduction to
Chapter 15, we get ethene by the cracking of fractions from crude oil. The ethene reacts with steam,


using a catalyst of phosphoric(V) acid, to make ethanol (see Section 15.3):
+ 2%


ethene steam ethanol
This is a relatively cheap, continuous process, especially for countries with their own reserves of crude
oil. But ethanol made this way still costs more than petrol, as well as using up our remaining oil


reserves.
Brazil is one country that has started making ethanol on a large scale. However, they do not use
ethene. They start with sugar extracted from sugar cane. The sugar solution is fermented in a batch
process with yeast to produce ethanol as fuel for cars. The fermentation only needs a warm


temperature to take place.
The ethanol made needs to be distilled from the reaction mixture. This requires energy but more sugar
cane (or sugar beet in colder climates) can be grown each year. So ethanol made this way is a


renewable biofuel, unlike fossil fuels.


The ethanol itself can be used in cars with adapted engines or in normal cars as a mixture with petrol.
But the environment could really benefit if we start using more ethanol as a fuel. The huge volume of
carbon dioxide given off from fossil fuels is causing global climate change. But carbon dioxide is also


given off during the fermentation of sugar, as well as when ethanol burns:


C,H;OH + 30, > 2CO, + 3H,0
However, the carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere is offset by carbon dioxide absorbed during


photosynthesis as sugar cane grows:


6CO, + + 602


Questions for discussion

Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e is difficult to achieve 100% carbon-neutrality, a perfect balance between CO, released and CO,
absorbed. This might be because fossil fuels are often used in manufacturing fertilisers, harvesting


and transporting the crops for processing, and distributing the ethanol.
Discuss in small groups how we could make ethanol biofuel even more environmentally friendly.


Make a list of suggestions to share with the whole group.


 


17.1 The homologous series of alcohols
Alcohols are organic molecules containing the hydroxyl group, OH. With one hydroxy! group substituted


into an alkane molecule, the general formula is


The alcohols are named by adding ‘-anol’ to the alkane stem. For example, is called methanol.


Classifying alcohols
For alcohol molecules with three or more carbon atoms, the position of the hydroxyl group is shown by
inserting a number to indicate which carbon atom is bonded to the group. Figure 17.2 gives some


examples.

H,C—CH—OH


CH,
propan-1-ol propan-2-ol 2-methylpropan-2-ol


primary alcohol secondary alcohol alcohol
Figure 17.2: Note that the numbering to show the position of the group in an alcohol starts from the end of the


molecule that gives the smaller number.


 
Propan-1-ol is classified as a primary alcohol. The carbon atom bonded to the —OH group is attached to
one other carbon atom (alkyl group). Propan-2-ol is a secondary alcohol as the carbon atom bonded to
the group is attached to two other carbon atoms (alkyl groups). With three alkyl groups attached, 2-


methylpropan-2-ol is an example of a tertiary alcohol.
There are also alcohols with more than one —OH group. We came across an example in Section 15.4 when
an alkene is oxidised to form a ‘diol’, ethane-1,2-diol. Its structural formula is Both the
hydroxy groups are bonded to a group, so both are classified as primary. On the other hand, a diol
such as propane-1,2-diol, has one primary and one secondary —OH group within its


molecules.


Properties of alcohols
The alcohols have higher boiling points than expected when compared with other organic molecules with
similar relative molecular masses. Even methanol, the alcohol with the lowest molar mass, is a liquid at
room temperature. This occurs because of hydrogen bonding between alcohol molecules (see Section 4.8).
Hydrogen bonding also explains why the smaller alcohol molecules are so miscible (mix and dissolve well)


in water.


Comparing the acidity of alcohols and water
Once dissolved in water, ethanol molecules do not dissociate (split up) to any great extent, although there


is a very small degree of dissociation:


= (aq) + H* (aq)


ethanol ethoxide ion
The position of equilibrium lies well over to the left, favouring the undissociated molecules. Even


compared to the dissociation of water molecules:

H,O(1) = H*(aq) + (aq)
the concentration of ions is much lower. So we can say that ethanol is a weaker acid than water: its



molecules are less likely to dissociate and form ions. This is because of the electron-donating
(ethyl) group bonded to the negatively charged oxygen atom in the ethoxide ion. The positive inductive
effect of the ethyl group (see Section 27.1) has the effect of concentrating more negative charge on this
oxygen atom. So the ethoxide ion more readily accepts an H ion than the hydroxide ions, from the
dissociation of water. The hydroxide ion only has a hydrogen atom bonded to its negatively charged


oxygen, and no alkyl groups.
Question
a_ Explain how hydrogen bonds arise:
i between ethanol molecules
ii ethanol and water molecules.


b why ethanol mixes with water in all proportions but hexan-1-ol is less miscible with water.
c the structural formula of 2-methylbutan-2-ol, and classify it as a primary, secondary or


tertiary alcohol.
d i Give the structural difference that makes an alcohol a weaker acid than water.
ii which type of alcohol is the weakest acid:
aprimary alcohol
alcohol


alcohol


difference
Working as a pair, with your book closed, explain to your partner why ethanol is a weaker acid than


water. Then listen while your partner talks about why water is a stronger acid than ethanol.


Finish by opening the book and checking how you did.


17.2 Reactions to make alcohols
Alcohols do occur in nature, for example, in rotting fruit that undergoes fermentation. There are also plenty

of ways that chemists can produce alcohols. Here is a summary of the reactions you need to know:
electrophilic addition of steam, to an alkene, using a concentrated phosphoric(V) acid,

catalyst (see Section 15.3):

CoH, +
ethene ethanol
oxidation of alkenes with cold, dilute, acidified potassium to form a diol (see Section
15.4). Remember that we can use the symbol [O] to represent oxygen provided by an oxidising agent


in organic reactions:


C,H, + + [O]
ethane—1.2—diol
nucleophilic substitution (hydrolysis in this case) of a halogenoalkane by heating with NaOH(aq) (see


Section 16.2):


+ NaOH CH;CH,OH + NaBr
bromoethane ethanol
reduction of an aldehyde (to form a primary alcohol) or of a ketone (to form a secondary alcohol) using


a reducing agent, such as NaBH, or (see Section 18.3):


CH,CH,CHO + + CH;CH,CH,OH
propanal
CH;COCH; +


propanone
reduction of a carboxylic acid using or LiAIH, (see Section 17.4):


CH;COOH + CH;CH,OH+ H,O


ethanoic acid ethanol


or / Ni and heat
hydrolysis of an ester by heating with a dilute acid or alkali (see Section 17.3):
e with acid
H (aq)

+ = CH;COOH +
e with alkali
+ NaOH — +


17.3 Reactions of the alcohols


Combustion
When ignited, the alcohols react with oxygen in the air (Figure 17.3). The products of complete combustion


are carbon dioxide and water.


alcohol + oxygen carbon dioxide + water


For example, ethanol burns with a clean blue flame in a good supply of air:
+ 30, + 2CO, + 3H,0


ethanol


 


Figure 17.3: The fuel called ‘gasohol’ is a mixture of ethanol and petrol.


 


Substitution to form a halogenoalkane
In this substitution reaction with a hydrogen halide, such as hydrogen chloride, the group in the


alcohol is replaced by a halogen atom. This produces a halogenoalkane.


IMPORTANT
The general equation is:
alcohol + hydrogen halide > halogenoalkane + water


For example:


+ HCl > H,0


ethanol chloroethane


 
The dry hydrogen chloride gas for this reaction can be made in situ (in the reaction vessel). Sodium


chloride and concentrated sulfuric acid are used for this:


NaCl + > NaHSO, +


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 17.1


Halogenation of an alcohol
The alcohol is heated under reflux (see apparatus in Section 16.2) with the reactants to make the
halogenoalkane. The halogenoalkane made can then be distilled off from the reaction mixture and


collected as oily droplets under water (Figure 17.4).
Figure 17.4: Bromoethane being distilled off following the reaction between ethanol and hydrogen bromide. The
white solid visible in the pear-shaped flask is sodium bromide (crystals). The sodium bromide reacts with concentrated


sulfuric or phosphoric(V) acid to make the hydrogen bromide needed for the reaction.


 


 
For a substitution reaction with hydrogen bromide, the HBr can be made using potassium bromide and


concentrated phosphoric (or sulfuric) acid.
The nucleophilic substitution by the halide ion takes place after the -OH group has accepted an H* ion


from the acid. This makes the C—O bond in the alcohol easier to break, and water is given off.
Sulfur dichloride oxide, can also be used to substitute a chlorine atom into an alcohol molecule, as


shown below:


+ > + HCl +
Note that in this reaction the two by-products of the reaction (HCI and are both gases. These gases
escape from the reaction mixture. The halogenoalkane is formed, without the need to heat the reaction


mixture.
We can also use phosphorus halides to provide the halogen atoms for this substitution reaction with


alcohols.
For chloroalkanes we can use solid phosphorus(V) chloride,


+ + HCI + POCI3
The release of acidic hydrogen chloride gas from this reaction can be used as a test for the hydroxy! group.


You can see acidic steamy fumes from the HCI gas produced.

chloride can also be used to halogenate an alcohol, but this reaction does require heating.
+ +



For bromoalkanes and iodoalkanes, we can make the halide, PBr3 or Plz, needed for the


reaction. Red phosphorus and bromine or iodine are warmed with the alcohol.


For example:


+ PI; 3C,H;I +


iodoethane
Question
Starting with an alkene, give the reactants and conditions needed to produce:
i propanol
ii
b a balanced equation for the complete combustion of:
i propan-1-ol

c i Write a balanced equation to show the reaction between ethanol and hydrogen bromide.
ii are the reagents and conditions used for this reaction?


What do we call this type of reaction?
Now go through your answers to Question 2 with a fellow learner and discuss any differences. Then


check against the actual answers.


Reaction with sodium metal
In the reaction with hydrogen halides, the C—O bond in the alcohol breaks as it loses its -OH group.
However, in some other reactions the O-H bond in the alcohol breaks. The reaction with sodium metal is an


example:
+ 2Na
ethanol sodium sodium ethoxide hydrogen
The reaction is similar to sodium’s reaction with water, but less vigorous. In both cases hydrogen gas is
given off and a basic ionic compound is formed. With ethanol, if the excess ethanol is allowed to evaporate


off after the reaction, a white crystalline solid is left. This is sodium ethoxide.
Other alcohols react in a similar way with sodium. For example, propan-1-ol would produce sodium


propoxide plus hydrogen gas.


IMPORTANT


In general:


alcohol + sodium sodium alkoxide + hydrogen


 
We find that the longer the hydrocarbon chain in the alcohol, the less vigorous the reaction with sodium


metal (Figure 17.5).


 
Figure 17.5: Sodium reacting with ethanol. The pink colour is from a colourless phenolphthalein indicator that has been


added to the ethanol, showing the basic nature of the sodium ethoxide formed in the ethanol.

 


Question
3 reacts with alcohols in a similar way to sodium.
piece of lithium metal is dropped onto a watch-glass containing propan-1-ol.
what you would observe.


b the products of the reaction.

Suggest what difference you would see if you used sodium instead of lithium in this reaction.
Esterification



Another reaction that involves the breaking of the O-H bond in alcohols is esterification, i.e. the making
of esters. An esterification reaction can take place between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid. It can be


classified as a condensation reaction.


IMPORTANT


The general equation is:


strong acid


carboxylic acid + alcohol ester + water


REFLECTION
At this point, review your knowledge of the reactions of the alcohols covered so far in this chapter.
Go back to Section 17.2 ‘Reactions to make alcohols’ and look at each chemical equation since
then, covering the products with a sheet of paper. Try to complete each equation on your sheet of


paper, checking your answers as you go along. How did you do?
If you know the type of reaction taking place it is a lot easier to identify the products formed.


Discuss with a partner any strategies you have found useful to help remember organic equations.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 17.2


Alcohol plus carboxylic acid
For esterification to take place, the carboxylic acid and alcohol are heated under reflux with a strong
acid catalyst (usually concentrated sulfuric acid, but also phosphoric(V) acid). The reaction is
reversible, so an equilibrium mixture can be established with all the reactants and products shown in


the general equation present.


The esters formed usually have sweet, fruity smells.


 


Here is an example of an esterification reaction:


+ +
OH


ethanol acid ethyl ethanoate water
The ester formed is called ethanoate.
But what would be the name of the ester formed if ethanol was reacted with propanoic acid?


Would it be propyl ethanoate or ethyl propanoate?
The answer is ethyl propanoate. That’s because the first part of an ester’s name comes from the alcohol: in
this case ethanol, giving ‘ethyl The second part comes from the carboxylic acid, in this case propanoic


acid, giving ‘... propanoate’. This makes ‘ethyl propanoate’ as the name of the ester formed (Figure 17.6).



CH;CH,COOH + +


propanoic acid ethanol ethyl propanoate water


 
Figure 17.6: Esters contribute to the complex mixture of substances blended in a perfume. They are also present


naturally in fruits, and we use them in artificial flavourings and as solvents, e.g. in nail varnish remover.


 


Hydrolysis of esters


IMPORTANT


Esters can be hydrolysed by heating under reflux with either an acid or a base.


 
Refluxing with an acid, such as dilute sulfuric acid, simply reverses the preparation of the ester from an
alcohol and a carboxylic acid. The reaction is reversible and an equilibrium mixture is established. In acid
hydrolysis, there are always both reactants (ester + water) and products (carboxylic acid + alcohol)


present after the reaction.


The equation for the acid hydrolysis of the ester ethyl ethanoate is:

H*(aq)
+ +


However, when an ester is refluxed with an alkali (a soluble base), such as aqueous sodium hydroxide, it is



fully hydrolysed. Unlike acid hydrolysis, this is not a reversible reaction, so all the ester present can be


broken down by excess alkali. An alcohol and the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid are formed.


The equation for the base hydrolysis of ethyl ethanoate is:

+ +
O—CH2CH3 sodium
ethanoate


Question
4 a_ ester formed in each of the following reactions :
i butan-1-ol + ethanoic acid
ii ethanol + hexanoic acid


and methanoic acid.


b the structural formula of each ester formed in part a.


Dehydration
Alcohols can also undergo elimination reactions in which water is lost, and in this case, alkenes are formed.
As the small molecule removed from the alcohol molecule is this reaction is also known as


dehydration.
talyst
alcohol alkene + water


eal
The reaction takes place when alcohol vapour is passed over a hot catalyst of aluminium oxide powder.


Pieces of porous pot or pumice, as well as a concentrated acid, also catalyse the reaction.
For example:


+ H,O


Figure 17.7 shows how you would collect the ethene gas formed.
ceramic wool


soaked in ethanol


      
ethene gas collected


over water


Figure 17.7: The dehydration of ethanol to give ethene.


 


Question


5 sulfuric acid or phosphoric acid can be used to catalyse the dehydration of an alcohol.
The alcohol and concentrated acid are heated to about 170 °C. The concentrated acid does not


change chemically during the reaction.


an equation showing the dehydration of ethanol using concentrated sulfuric acid.

propan-1-ol was used instead of ethanol, name the organic product formed.


Oxidation
In Section 17.1 we saw how alcohols can be classified as primary, secondary or tertiary. For most of their
reactions, the class of alcohol makes no difference to the type of products formed. In organic chemistry, we
can usually generalise for the whole homologous series. However, when alcohols are oxidised, primary,


secondary and tertiary alcohols each behave differently.


IMPORTANT


Primary and secondary alcohols can be oxidised by potassium solution,
acidified with dilute sulfuric acid. Tertiary alcohols are not oxidised by acidified potassium


solution.


 
The orange colour of acidified potassium dichromate(VI) solution is caused by the dichromate(VI) ions,

When the ions behave as an oxidising agent, the ions themselves are reduced.
They become ions, Cr3+(aq), which form a green solution. The reaction mixture needs to be
warmed before the oxidation takes place.



The product formed when you attempt to oxidise an alcohol can be used to distinguish between primary,


secondary and tertiary alcohols.
With tertiary alcohols, a mixture of the tertiary alcohol, dilute sulfuric acid and potassium


solution remains orange when warmed. No reaction takes place.
A secondary alcohol, such as propan-2-ol, will be oxidised to form a ketone. In this case propanone is

formed and the reaction mixture turns green:



H3C—C— + [O] C— +
propanone
Remember that simplified oxidation equations use [O] to show the oxygen added from the oxidising agent


(see Section 14.8).
With a primary alcohol, such as ethanol, the alcohol is oxidised to an aldehyde. Ethanol is oxidised to


ethanal:



Il
+ [O] H3C—C—H +


ethanal


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 17.3


Distinguishing tertiary alcohols
Given three unknown alcohols, one primary, one secondary and one tertiary, it is easy to distinguish
the tertiary alcohol. Figure 17.8 shows the results of warming each class of alcohol with a solution of


acidified potassium
Propan-1-ol


(primary alchohol)
Propan-2-ol


(secondary


|



|


2-methyl-propan-2-ol


|
Figure 17.8: Before warming with the labelled alcohol, each of these tubes contained orange acidified potassium
dichromate(VI) solution. After warming, the orange ions have been reduced to green chromium(III) ions
by the primary and secondary alcohols. This shows that both the primary and secondary alcohols have been oxidised,


but the tertiary alcohol, 2-methylpropan-2-ol, has not.


 


 
The ethanal formed can be further oxidised to form ethanoic acid, a carboxylic acid. This is achieved by


refluxing with excess acidified potassium dichromate(VI):

ll Il
+ C—OH
ethanal ethanoic acid


Question


Working with a partner, discuss and answer these questions:
can be oxidised to propanal, CH3CH2CHO, and then further oxidised to propanoic acid,


Give the reagents and conditions that should be used to oxidise propan-1-ol to propanal.
b a balanced chemical equation for this oxidation. Represent oxygen from the oxidising agent


as [O].

the reagents and conditions that should be used to oxidise propan-1-ol to propanoic acid.
a balanced chemical equation for this oxidation. Again, show oxygen from the oxidising
agent as [O].


17.4 Carboxylic acids


Reactions that form carboxylic acids
We have already seen how primary alcohols can be oxidised to aldehydes, which are then further oxidised
to form carboxylic acids. The primary alcohol is refluxed with acidified potassium chromate(VI) solution (or


acidified potassium solution.
Carboxylic acids are also made from nitriles, R-C=N. When a nitrile is refluxed with dilute hydrochloric acid,
hydrolysis occurs. The —C=N group at the end of the hydrocarbon chain is converted to the —COOH group,


forming a carboxylic acid (see Section 18.4).


For example:


+ HCl + — CH;CH,COOH + NH,Cl


propanenitrile propanoic acid


Reacting as typical acids
Carboxylic acids are described as weak acids because their molecules do not dissociate (ionise) completely
when added to water. However, a small proportion of the molecules do dissociate. The carboxylic acid
molecules then release ions. The solutions made have a pH value less than 7. For example,


ethanoic acid forms aqueous hydrogen ions and ethanoate ions in water:


(aq) + H* (aq)


ethanoic acid ethanoate ion


You can learn more about the dissociation of carboxylic acids in Chapter 26.
The presence of excess H*(aq) ions in solutions of carboxylic acids means that they undergo all the usual

reactions of acids. They react with:
alkalis to form a salt and water:

CH3COOH + NaOH CH3COONa +
reactive metals to form a salt and hydrogen gas:


2CH3COOH + Mg +


carbonates to form a salt, water and carbon dioxide gas:


2CH3COOH + K,CO3 + + CO,
The salts formed in the three reactions above are called sodium ethanoate, magnesium ethanoate and


potassium ethanoate, respectively.


Reduction of carboxylic acids
Carboxylic acids can be reduced to their corresponding primary alcohol by using the reducing agent lithium
tetrahydridoaluminate, in dry ether at room temperature. The liquid ether is dried because


reacts violently with any water present.
In the simplified reduction equation, you can use the symbol [H] to represent the hydrogen atoms from the
reducing agent. Remember that in organic chemistry, you can think of reduction as the addition of


hydrogen atoms.


So, for ethanoic acid being reduced to ethanol, we can show the reaction as:


CH3COOH + 4[H] > +
Question


7 Describe how would you make ethanoic acid from ethanenitrile.

b a balanced equation, using structural formulae for the organic compounds, to show the


formation of:
i sodium methanoate, using sodium hydroxide as one of the reactants
ii potassium ethanoate, using potassium metal as one of the reactants


lithium propanoate, using lithium carbonate as one of the reactants.
Name and give the formula of the reducing agent used to convert carboxylic acids to primary


alcohols.


REFLECTION
Make a mind map to summarise the oxidation and reduction of alcohols. Label the links with the
reaction conditions needed. Ensure you include how alcohols are formed, as well as the products


made when alcohols themselves are oxidised and reduced.
Check your mind maps with a partner and revise your own if necessary. What did your partner


particularly notice about your mind map?
Reflect on the use of the symbols [O] and [H] in organic reactions. Discuss with your partner how
these symbols help you to identify the products of reduction and oxidation and make organic

chemistry easier to understand.



SUMMARY
Esters can be hydrolysed by an acid or by a base. Acid hydrolysis is a reversible reaction but base hydrolysis is not


reversible.
Elimination of water from an alcohol produces an alkene; the reaction is called dehydration. Dehydration may be
carried out by passing alcohol vapour over heated pumice, porous pot or aluminium oxide, or by using a


concentrated acid catalysts.
A primary alcohol can be oxidised to an aldehyde by heating the alcohol gently with acidified potassium
(and distilling out the aldehyde as it forms: see Section 18.2). The primary alcohol can be further


oxidised to a carboxylic acid by refluxing the alcohol with excess acidified potassium dichromate(VI).


A secondary alcohol can be oxidised to a ketone by heating the alcohol with acidified potassium dichromate(VI).
Acidified potassium changes colour from orange to green when it oxidises a primary or secondary


alcohol. However, tertiary alcohols cannot be oxidised by refluxing with acidified potassium


Carboxylic acids can be formed from the oxidation of primary alcohols or aldehydes by refluxing with excess
potassium dichromate(VI) and dilute sulfuric(VI) acid. They can also be made by refluxing nitriles with dilute


hydrochloric acid.
Carboxylic acids are weak acids that react with reactive metals, alkalis or carbonates to form carboxylate salts.


The carboxylic acids can be reduced by in dry ether, to form primary alcohols.


 


 


one of these reactions will produce a primary alcohol ? [1]
hydrolysis of a nitrile
elimination of a halogenoalkane by ethanolic sodium hydroxide
of a carboxylic acid
D_ reduction of an aldehyde
2 is the organic product when alcohol vapour is passed over hot aluminium oxide? [1]
analdehyde
acid




butan-1-ol and 2-methylpropan-2-ol are alcohols.


each one:
[3]
give its molecular formula
3
give its structural formula
3
give its displayed formula
3
iv give its skeletal formula
3
state whether it is a primary, secondary or tertiary alcohol.
1
Give the general formula that is used to represent alcohols.
of the alcohols in this question are isomers of each other.
Identify which two and name the type of isomerism they show.
1
the alcohol whose structural formula is [Total:
4 Write a balanced chemical equation for each of the following processes. Structural or displayed
formulae should be used for all organic substances.
2
ethanol, using ethene as feedstock. Include the formula of the catalyst used.
2
b The complete combustion of ethanol in oxygen. (2]
dehydration of butan-2-ol when passed over hot Al,03.
3
Suggest three equations, one for each of the three possible products.
reaction of ethanoic acid with ethanol.
Name the catalyst used, the type of reaction and the products. [Total: 11]
5 and secondary alcohols can be oxidised by heating with a mixture of potassium
and dilute sulfuric(VI) acid.
A primary alcohol can be oxidised to two different products, depending on the conditions used.
A secondary alcohol forms one product when oxidised.
Tertiary alcohols cannot be oxidised.


[1]

the chemical formula of potassium
a primary alcohol of your choice as an example:


 


SELF-EVALUATION
Ican


explain the acidity of alcohols compared with water
write equations for the reactions we can use to produce


alcohols, to include reagents and conditions
write equations for the reactions of alcohols in their
combustion, substitution, reaction with sodium, oxidation to
carbonyl compounds and carboxylic acids, and dehydration to


alkenes
classify hydroxy compounds into primary, secondary and


tertiary alcohols
suggest characteristic distinguishing reactions, e.g. mild


oxidation


describe the acid and base hydrolysis of esters
describe the formation of carboxylic acids from alcohols,


aldehydes and nitriles
describe the reactions of carboxylic acids in the formation of


salts, alkyl esters and primary alcohols.


See


section...


 
Needs


more work
Almost


there
Ready to

move on



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS
BEFORE YOU START
Which equation below describes what happens when a ketone is reduced?
+ 2[H] >
+ 2[H] >
+ Hy CH3CH(OH)CH3


+ H,0 CH3CH(OH)CH3 +

Describe the first step in the reaction mechanism when is mixed with
Draw the displayed formula of your choice to represent:

alcohol

alcohol

alcohol.


Discuss what happens in these addition reactions:


a_ bromine reacts with ethene


forms poly(ethene).


USING ALDEHYDES AND KETONES


 
Aromatic carbonyl compounds have very distinctive, almond-like odours. Benzaldehyde is used to
make almond essence, the flavouring used in some cakes and puddings. Benzaldehyde is also a
component of the mixtures that make up the smells and flavours of many fruits such as mangoes,
cherries, apricots, plums and peaches. The structures of heptan-2-one and benzaldehyde are shown in


Figure 18.1.
More complex aldehydes and ketones also occur in common smells and flavours, such as the lemony
odour of citronella candles. Citronella candles can be used to repel mosquitoes. The common name for
the aldehyde responsible for the smell is citronellal. Chemists can extract (take out) this aldehyde from
lemongrass and citronella grass. The structural formula of citronellal, with the aldehyde function group


in bold, is:


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Carry out some research to find the name and structure of the aldehyde responsible for the sweet


smell of vanilla.

e Then discuss the difference between the structures of molecules of aldehydes and ketones.
e Finish by each drawing the skeletal formula of citronellal, then compare each efforts.


 


heptan-2-one benzaldehyde


 
Figure 18.1: a Heptan-2-one, a ketone, is responsible for the smell of blue cheese. b Benzaldehyde, an aldehyde,
contributes to the flavours of many fruits and nuts. You can see the structures of heptan-2-one and benzaldehyde


above from their displayed formulae.


 


 
18.1 The homologous series of aldehydes and


ketones


You briefly looked at aldehydes and ketones, the main classes of carbonyl compounds, in Chapter 17.


IMPORTANT


Remember that:
aldehydes can be formed from the oxidation of primary alcohols


ketones can be formed from the oxidation of secondary alcohols (see Section 18.2).


 
In aldehydes, the carbon atom in the carbonyl group, >C=O, is bonded to a carbon atom and a hydrogen


atom. In other words, the carbonyl group is positioned at the end of a carbon chain.
In ketones, the carbonyl group is attached to two other carbon atoms. Tables 18.1 and 18.2 give examples


from the start of these homologous series.
Table 18.1: The names of aldehydes are derived from the name of the equivalent alkane, with the ‘-e’ at the end of the
name replaced by ‘-al’. Note that numbers are not needed when naming aldehydes, as the carbonyl group is always at the


end of the carbon chain.


 


 
Table 18.2: Ketones are named by replacing the ‘-e’ at the end of the alkane with ‘-one’. However, in ketone molecules


that are larger than butanone we also need to indicate the position of the group.


 


 
Question
Name the following compounds:
i

the displayed formula of:

i methanal
ii



pentan-3-one.


c the skeletal formula of the compounds listed in part a.
Now compare your answers to Question 1 with another learner and discuss any differences. Then


check against the correct answers.


18.2 Preparation of aldehydes and ketones


Preparing aldehydes


The general equation for the reaction in which an aldehyde is made from a primary alcohol is:


IMPORTANT


primary alcohol + oxygen atom from oxidising agent aldehyde + water


 
For example:
+ CH;CH,CHO + H,O


propanal
The oxidising agent used is a solution of potassium dichromate(VI), which is orange, acidified with dilute
sulfuric acid. To make the aldehyde, the primary alcohol is heated gently with acidified dichromate solution.
The reaction mixture turns green as the orange dichromate ions, are reduced to green


(aq) ions.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 18.1


Oxidation of a primary alcohol
The acidified oxidising agent is added one drop at a time to the warm primary alcohol. The aldehyde
made is distilled off as it forms in the reaction vessel. This method works because the aldehyde
product will always have a lower boiling point than the alcohol reactant. If the aldehyde is not distilled
off as soon as it is formed, further heating with acidified dichromate solution will oxidise the aldehyde
produced to a carboxylic acid. The apparatus used to prepare a sample of ethanal is shown in Figure


18.2.
ethanol plus
acidified
potassium


 


gentle heat
Figure 18.2: Distilling off and collecting the aldehyde, ethanal, formed in the mild oxidation of a primary alcohol,


ethanol. The aqueous ethanal formed smells like rotting apples.

 



Preparing ketones


The general equation for making a ketone is:


IMPORTANT


 


secondary alcohol + oxygen atom from oxidising agent > ketone + water


For example:


+ [0] + CH;COCH; + H,0


propanone
Once again, the oxidising agent used is a solution of potassium acidified with dilute sulfuric


acid.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 18.2


Oxidation of a secondary alcohol
To produce a ketone, the acidified oxidising agent must be heated with a secondary alcohol. The


reaction mixture in the flask will change from orange to green.
Unlike aldehydes, the ketone formed cannot be further oxidised, even if you heat the reaction mixture
under reflux and add excess oxidising agent. Therefore, we do not need to distil off the ketone product


immediately.


 


Question
2 a i Write a balanced equation for the oxidation of ethanol to ethanal, using [O] to represent an


oxygen atom from the oxidising agent.
ii Give practical details to explain how you would use the reaction described in part a i to


prepare and collect a sample of ethanal.
b i Write a balanced equation for the oxidation of butan-2-ol to butanone, using [O] to represent


an oxygen atom from the oxidising agent.
ii do you observe in the reaction vessel if the oxidising agent used in part b iis
potassium solution, acidified with dilute sulfuric acid, and the reaction


mixture is heated?
Discuss each option to complete the following statement with another learner, and agree on


the correct answer:

The butanone does not have to be distilled off as it forms in the reaction vessel because ...

A it cannot be oxidised to a carboxylic acid.


B .. it has a higher boiling point than butan-2-ol.
itis easier to filter it off from the reaction mixture.


D .. it could be reduced back to when heated.


18.3 Reduction of aldehydes and ketones


Chemical reduction of an aldehyde or ketone produces an alcohol:


IMPORTANT


aldehyde + reducing agent primary alcohol


ketone + reducing agent > secondary alcohol


 
The reducing agent used is usually an aqueous alkaline solution of sodium tetrahydridoborate, or


lithium tetrahydridoaluminate, in dry ether.


The reduction reaction is carried out by either:


warming the aldehyde or ketone with an aqueous alkaline solution of sodium tetrahydridoborate, or
adding lithium tetrahydridoaluminate dissolved in a dry ether, such as diethyl ether, at room
temperature. The organic solvent has to be dry because lithium tetrahydridoaluminate is a more


powerful reducing agent than sodium tetrahydridoborate and reacts vigorously in water.
In the same way that we have used the symbol [O] in organic oxidation equations, we use the symbol [H]
in reduction equations. [H] represents a hydrogen atom from the reducing agent. Look at the equations


below used to summarise these reduction reactions:


+ + CH,CH,OH
ethanal ethanol
+ 2{H]
propanone


Question
3 Write a balanced equation for the reaction that takes place when propanal is warmed with an
aqueous alkaline solution of sodium tetrahydridoborate, using the symbol [H] to represent a


hydrogen atom from the reducing agent.
b the product formed in the reduction reaction if pentan-3-one is added to lithium

tetrahydridoaluminate in dry ether.
Compare your answers with those of another learner to arrive at two agreed answers.


18.4 Nucleophilic addition with HCN
The addition reactions we have met so far have involved electrophilic addition across the C=C double bond


in alkene molecules (see Section 15.3).
Aldehydes and ketones also both undergo addition reactions with hydrogen cyanide, HCN. In these
reactions, addition of HCN takes place across the C=O bond. However, the attack is by a nucleophile, not an


electrophile.
We can show this using the nucleophilic addition reaction of the aldehyde propanal when heated with
HCN. The HCN is generated in situ (in the reaction vessel) by the reaction of potassium cyanide, KCN, and


dilute sulfuric acid.


 
CH3CH2 OH
\ heat |
» CH3CH2 —C— C=N
KCN, catalyst |
H H


propanal 2-hydroxybutanenitrile
Note that a carbon atom has been added to the propanal molecule by the addition of the nitrile group
(-C=N). This is a useful reaction for chemists making new compounds as it increases the length of the


carbon chain in the original aldehyde molecule by one carbon atom.


IMPORTANT


 


The nitrile group (-C=N) can then be easily hydrolysed to a carboxylic acid.


You can carry out the hydrolysis of the nitrile group by refluxing with dilute hydrochloric acid:


-C=N+ HCl + 2H,O -COOH +


a carboxylic acid
You can also hydrolyse the nitrile group by refluxing with dilute alkali, such as sodium hydroxide solution. In
this reaction a sodium salt of the carboxylic acid, Na’, is formed. Therefore, if you want to produce


the carboxylic acid, -COOH, the products are treated with a strong acid, such as dilute sulfuric acid.


Mechanism of nucleophilic addition
The carbonyl group, >C=O, in aldehydes and ketones is polarised due to the high electronegativity of the
oxygen atom. The electrons in the C=O bond are drawn nearer to the O atom, giving it a partial negative
charge, and leaving the C atom with a partial positive charge. This makes the carbonyl C atom open to


attack by a nucleophile, such as the cyanide ion,


Note that the actual negative charge on a cyanide ion is on the carbon atom, not the nitrogen atom.


Step 1:

|
—

ff |


CN


intermediate
The negatively charged intermediate formed in the first step in the mechanism is highly reactive and
quickly reacts with an aqueous H* ion. The hydrogen ion could be from HCN, from dilute acid or from water


present in the reaction mixture. This forms the 2-hydroxynitrile product.


Step 2:
| |



CN CN


2-hydroxynitrile
All aldehydes and ketones form ‘2-hydroxynitriles’ when they undergo nucleophilic addition. This is


because the OH (hydroxyl) group will always be on the adjacent carbon atom to the nitrile group.
However, starting with the aldehyde methanal, HCHO, the hydroxynitrile formed in its nucleophilic addition
with HCN would be called hydroxyethanenitrile. In this case there is no need to insert the ‘2’ at the start of


its name as the OH group could only possibly bond to the single carbon atom next to the nitrile group.
Question
4 Working with a partner, answer these questions together:
the organic product that would be formed in the nucleophilic addition of HCN to:
i ethanal


diagrams and curly arrows to describe the mechanism of the reaction in part a i.


18.5 Testing for aldehydes and ketones
The reaction of an aldehyde or ketone with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine is an example of a condensation
reaction. In a condensation reaction, two molecules join together and, in the process, eliminate a small


molecule, in this case water. The equation for the reaction of ethanal with 2,4-DNPH is:



NO /
*
N H
\


H
atoms lost in condensation


reaction to form water
CH3


NO,




N H +
H


a 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone


2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine
Other classes of organic compound that also contain the group, >C=O (such as carboxylic acids


and esters), do not form precipitates with 2,4-DNPH.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 18.3


 


Testing with 2,4-DNPH
We can easily test for the presence of a carbonyl group in an aldehyde or ketone by adding a solution
of 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (often abbreviated to 2,4-DNPH). If an aldehyde or ketone is present, a


deep-orange precipitate is formed (Figure 18.3).
The structure of 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine is:


NO,
NH,



H
The precipitate formed can be purified by recrystallisation and its melting point can be measured
experimentally. The identity of the precipitated compound can then be found by referring to melting


point data. From this, we can identify the specific aldehyde or ketone used in the test.


 


Figure 18.3: The orange precipitate formed from 2,4-DNPH in a test with propanone, a ketone.


 


 
As we saw in Section 18.2, aldehydes can be further oxidised to form carboxylic acids, but ketones cannot
be oxidised easily. We can use this difference to distinguish between an aldehyde and a ketone in simple
chemical tests. The two most common tests involve mild oxidation using Tollens’ reagent or Fehling’s


solution.


practiCAL ACTIVITY 18.4

 
Testing with Tollens’ reagent



Tollens’ reagent is an aqueous solution of silver nitrate in excess ammonia solution, sometimes called
ammoniacal silver nitrate solution. The silver ions, in the solution act as a mild oxidising agent.


When warmed, the Agt ions will oxidise an aldehyde to form a carboxylate ion.
Under the alkaline conditions in the test, any carboxylic acid formed is immediately neutralised to the


carboxylate ion, as Ht is removed from —COOH and a salt is formed.
In the redox reaction with an aldehyde, the ions themselves are reduced to silver atoms. The
silver atoms form a ‘mirror’ on the inside of the tube, giving a positive test for an aldehyde (Figure


18.4).
There will be no change observed when a ketone is warmed with Tollens’ reagent as no redox reaction


takes place. It remains a colourless mixture in the test-tube.


 
Figure 18.4: The ‘before’ and ‘after’ observations when Tollens’ reagent is warmed with an aldehyde, such as


ethanal, CH3CHO.


 


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 18.5


Testing with Fehling’s solution
Fehling’s solution is an alkaline solution containing ions. When warmed with an aldehyde,
the ions act as an oxidising agent. The aldehyde is oxidised to a carboxylate ion while the Cu2+
ions are reduced to ions. The clear blue Fehling’s solution turns an opaque red / orange colour as a


precipitate of oxide forms throughout the solution (Figure 18.5).
As with Tollens’ reagent, ketones are not oxidised in this test, so there is no change. The Fehling’s


solution remains blue when warmed.
Figure 18.5: 'The ‘before’ and ‘after’ observations when Fehling’s solution is warmed with an aldehyde, such as


ethanal, CH3CHO.


 


 


Question
5 The melting points of the derivatives of the reaction between 2,4-DNPH and various aldehydes and


ketones are shown in the table.


Product of reaction between 2,4-DNPH and... Melting point / °C


ethanal


propanal


propanone


butanone


 
Describe your observations when each of the compounds in the table is mixed with 2,4-

DNPH.
b was formed between 2,4-DNPH and an unknown carbonyl compound.


i The melting point of the derivative was 126 °C. Deduce what this result tells you.
ii ©The unknown carbonyl compound formed an orange precipitate when warmed with Fehling’s


solution. Name the unknown compound.
iii Describe and explain the different results obtained when the compound named in part b ii is
warmed with Tollens’ reagent in a test-tube and then the same test is performed on


butanone.
c a half-equation to show silver ions acting as an oxidising agent in a positive test for an


aldehyde.
Write a half-equation to show copper(II) ions acting as an oxidising agent in a positive test for an


aldehyde.


REFLECTION


At this point, join another learner to discuss and reflect on your progress so far in this chapter.
Do you know how to prepare aldehydes and ketones?


Can you write equations for their reduction and the oxidation of aldehydes?
What about explaining the mechanism of nucleophilic addition, as well as testing for aldehydes


and ketones?
Discuss with a partner the thought processes you need to go through to construct the mechanism


for the nucleophilic condensation reaction between ethanal and HCN.


 


18.6 Reactions to form tri-iodomethane
Tri-iodomethane (iodoform) forms as a yellow precipitate with methyl ketones, i.e. compounds containing
the CH3CO- group (Figure 18.6). Note that ethanal, CH3CHO, an aldehyde, also contains the group.
Chemists use the appearance of the yellow precipitate as evidence of the group in an unknown


compound.
The reagent used is an alkaline solution of iodine, which is warmed together with the substance being


tested.


 


Figure 18.6: The yellow precipitate of tri-iodomethane forming.


 


The reaction involves two steps:
carbonyl compound is halogenated: the three hydrogen atoms in the CH3 methyl group are replaced


by iodine atoms


intermediate is hydrolysed to form the yellow precipitate of tri-iodomethane, (Figure 18.6).
When separated from the reaction mixture, the yellow crystals of tri-iodomethane can be positively


identified by their melting point of 119 °C.


Here, R is an alkyl group in a ketone:


Step 1 Step 2
1,, NaOH(aq) NaOH{(aq)


halogenation hydrolysis


RCOCI; ——> RCOO-Nat +


a methyl ketone tri-iodomethane

Testing for the group
The tri-iodomethane test can also be used to identify the presence of a secondary alcohol, with the hydroxy



group (—OH) on the carbon atom next to a group. This group is firstly oxidised by the
alkaline iodine solution. This oxidation forms a methyl ketone, RCOCH3, which then reacts via the two steps
shown at the bottom of the first column. The products of the reaction are the yellow tri-iodomethane


precipitate, and the sodium salt of a carboxylic acid,
Question


Work with a partner, if possible, to discuss your reasoning as you answer the questions below together:
6 a i When propanone is warmed with alkaline iodine solution, a yellow precipitate is formed.


Name and draw the displayed formula of the yellow precipitate.
Give the structural formulae of the organic products formed in both steps of the reaction in


part i.
naming any organic products formed, why ethanol gives a positive test (yellow


precipitate) when warmed with alkaline iodine solution.
of these compounds will give a yellow precipitate when treated with alkaline aqueous


iodine?








F
At this point in the Coursebook you have finished the organic reactions needed for the AS Level course. You
can be asked to devise a synthetic route (a series of reactions) to make a named product using any of the
reactions in Chapters 14 to 18. A useful summary of these reactions is given in Table 29.4 found in Section


29.3. You can also try Question 8 at the end of this chapter as an example of devising synthetic routes.


18.7 Infrared spectroscopy
In infrared spectroscopy a sample being analysed is irradiated (exposed to radiation) with
electromagnetic waves in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The machine used is called
a spectrophotometer. It detects the intensity of the wavelengths of infrared radiation that passes through


the sample.
This analytical technique is particularly useful for organic chemists because all organic molecules absorb
radiation in the infrared range of wavelengths. The energy absorbed corresponds to changes in the
vibration of the bonds between atoms. The bonds can vibrate by stretching, bending and twisting. They
have a natural frequency at which they vibrate. If we irradiate the molecules with energy that corresponds
to this frequency, it stimulates larger vibrations and energy is absorbed. This is called the resonance


frequency of that vibration.
Each type of vibration will absorb characteristic wavelengths of infrared radiation. Scientists often express


these as the reciprocal of the wavelength, in a unit called wavenumbers (measured in
0
20


40


60


Absorbance / %


80
100


4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /
Figure 18.7: The infrared spectrum of ethylamine, Note that the percentage absorbance and the


wavenumbers on the axes both get smaller in magnitude along each axis.


 
We cannot be too specific when quoting the characteristic absorption frequency of a bond: the nature of
the rest of the molecule shifts the energy absorbed in each particular molecule. However, we can say, for


example, that the amine group absorbs in the range 3300 to 3500
Therefore, we can identify the presence (or absence) of different functional groups from the absorbance


pattern on an infrared spectrum. Look at the infrared spectrum of ethylamine in Figure 18.7.
We can use the characteristic infrared spectrum of an unknown compound to identify it by ‘fingerprinting’
from a database of known spectra. Some characteristic absorption ranges of common bonds and the


functional groups containing the bonds are shown in Table 18.3.
hydroxy, ester 1040-1300

aromatic compound, alkene 1500-1680




amide 1640-1690
carbonyl, carboxyl 1670-1740


ester 1710-1750
O-H carboxyl 2500-3000


hydroxy 3200-3600


Table 18.3: Some characteristic infrared absorbance bands.


 


 
The values needed to answer questions will usually be given to you. You can see that absorption bands
overlap considerably. That is why we need to use a variety of techniques, such as NMR, infrared
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, to work out the structure of a new organic compound (see Chapter


29).
As well as their wavenumber bands, particular absorbances have characteristic widths (broad or sharp
peaks) and intensities (strong or weak) on the infrared spectrum. For example, the presence of hydrogen
bonding makes the absorbance of the O-H bonds in alcohols and carboxylic acids broad. By contrast, the


C=O bond in carbonyl groups has a strong, sharp absorbance peak.


Look at the infrared spectra of ethanol, ethanoic acid and ethyl ethanoate shown in Figures 18.8-18.10.
Using the data in Table 18.3, note the broad bands between 3200 and 3600 in Figures 18.8 and 18.9
arising from the O-H groups involved in hydrogen bonding in the alcohol and in the carboxylic acid.
Contrast the width of these peaks with the sharp peak between 1710 and 1750 of the carbonyl group


in the ester, ethyl ethanoate, in Figure 18.10.


0
N


Absorbance / %




100


4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


Figure 18.8: The infrared spectrum of ethanol,


 


20


40


60


Absorbance / %


80
100


4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


Figure 18.9: The infrared spectrum of ethanoic acid, CH3COOH.


 


0
Absorbance / %




100


4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


Figure 18.10: The infrared spectrum of ethyl ethanoate,


 

Question
7 at the two infrared spectra below:


>


20


40


60


Absorbance / %


80
00
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


20


40


60


Absorbance / %


80
00
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


Figure 18.2: Infrared spectra for Question 7.


 


one of the infrared spectra is that of butanone and which one is of butan-2-ol?


Explain your reasoning in part a.


 
share your answers to Question 7 with another learner and discuss your thinking in
interpreting the infrared spectra in Q7. Then discuss and analyse the spectra in Figures 18.8, 18.9


and 18.10.


2 Look at the table at the end of this chapter and judge whether you need to:


e read through a topic again to make sure you really understand it

e seek more guidance on a topic, even after going over it again.




Aldehydes and ketones contain the carbonyl group, >C=O:
e in aldehydes, the carbonyl group is bonded to one other carbon atom and a hydrogen atom


in ketones, the carbonyl group is bonded to two other carbon atoms.
The names of aldehydes are derived from the name of the alkane with the ‘-e’ at the end replaced by ‘-al’.


Similarly, ketones are named with the ‘-e’ replaced by ‘-one’.
Carbonyl compounds are readily reduced by aqueous or dissolved in dry ether:
reduction of an aldehyde forms a primary alcohol


reduction of a ketone produces a secondary alcohol.
Aldehydes are readily oxidised under mild conditions to carboxylic acids. Ketones are not oxidised under mild


conditions.
The polar nature of the carbonyl group in aldehydes and ketones enables them to undergo nucleophilic addition by


reacting with the cyanide ions from HCN. The product is a 2-hydroxynitrile.
The reagent 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (2,4-DNPH) can be used to identify the presence of a carbonyl group in an
aldehyde or ketone. It produces an orange precipitate. The melting point of the product is used to identify particular

aldehydes and ketones.

As aldehydes are readily oxidised, they may be distinguished from ketones on warming with suitably mild oxidising

reagents:
e with aldehydes, Tollens’ reagent produces a silver mirror inside a warmed test-tube and Fehling’s solution turns


from a blue solution to a red / orange precipitate when warmed
with ketones, there is no oxidation reaction, so no changes are observed when ketones are warmed with Tollens’

reagent or Fehling’s solution.

Chemists can use alkaline iodine solution to test for:

methyl ketones (and ethanal)


e ethanol or secondary alcohols with an adjacent group.


A yellow precipitate of tri-iodomethane is formed in a positive test.
Infrared spectroscopy helps to identify organic compounds by their absorption of energy in the infrared range of


wavelengths, matching their spectrum to a database of known infrared spectra.


 


 


Name the following compounds:
[1]
i
[1]

1
iii CH3CHO
[1]

[1]

[1]
vi CH3CH,CHO
1
of the compounds in part a are alcohols and which are carbonyl compounds?
1
of the carbonyl compounds in part a are aldehydes and which are ketones?
of the compounds in part a could be made by oxidising two of the others.


[4]


Identify these four compounds, stating which could be made from which.
ii the reagents and conditions you would use to carry out each oxidation and
write a balanced chemical equation for each oxidation. [O] can be used in the [4]


oxidation equations.
e Ethanol could be made by the reduction of one of the compounds in part a.


[1]


[1]
i Identify which compound this is.


ii the reagent you would use to carry out the reduction.

Write a balanced chemical equation for the reduction. [H] can be used in reduction

equations. [Total: 19]
2 reagent you would add to an unknown compound to test if it contains a

carbonyl group.

1


what you would see if the unknown compound did contain a carbonyl group.


[1]


why it would be useful to find the melting point of the product of this test. [Total: 3]


3 Draw the skeletal formulae of:
1
i pentan-2-one
[1]
ii pentan-3-one
[1]



[4]
the results you would expect to see if pentan-3-one and pentanal were


separately treated with Tollens’ reagent. Where a reaction takes place, name the organic
product and name the type of reaction that takes place.


[Total: 7]
can be made from ethanal using sodium as a reducing agent.
1
Give the formula of sodium tetrahydridoborate(III).
The reaction mechanism proceeds in a similar way to the steps in the reaction of ethanal
with HCN, but the initial attack is by the ion instead of the ion. The intermediate
then gains an H* ion from a water molecule to form the product, ethanol.

Using your knowledge of the reaction between ethanal and HCN, suggest the name of
the mechanism to reduce ethanal. Then describe the mechanism as fully as you can, [71
using curly arrows to show the movement of electron pairs. [Total: 8]



5 Acompound, X, has the following percentage composition:

66.7% carbon, 11.1% hydrogen and 22.2% oxygen.

3

the empirical formula of X.

1

The relative molecular mass of X is 72. Calculate the molecular formula.
the structural formulae and names of the three isomers of X that are carbonyl [3]


compounds.


[5]
how you could identify X using chemical means.
[Total: 12]
6 Analcohol has the molecular formula C3Hg0. When warmed with an alkaline solution of iodine it


forms a yellow precipitate.
the yellow precipitate.
the displayed formula of the alcohol.
The first stage in the reaction of the alcohol with alkaline iodine solution is an oxidation [1]
reaction. Name the organic product of this first stage.
d_ There are four isomeric alcohols with the formula
i Name the four isomeric alcohols.


[1]


ii Classify each one as a primary, secondary or tertiary alcohol.
of the four isomeric alcohols will give a yellow precipitate when warmed with [1]


an alkaline solution of iodine? [Total: 6]
7 data from the table below of characteristic infrared absorptions in organic molecules to answer


the following question.

alcohols, esters 1000-1300


aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters 1680-1750


One of the three spectra labelled A to C below is produced when ethanal is analysed in an infrared


 


 


 
spectrophotometer:
04
~




2


a



100
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


 

  

Bx 0-4









2









4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500

Wavenumber /

Cx













50



100 T T
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500


Wavenumber /


 
the three spectra above to decide which one is most likely to be produced by


ethanal?
[1]
[3]


[Total: 4]
8 can be obtained by cracking large hydrocarbons found in crude oil. Suggest how ethene can


be converted into the following compounds, stating the reagents and conditions needed.

Give three reasons for your choice.


[2]
ethylamine
4
[4]

[4]
acid [Total: 10]


SELF-EVALUATION
Needs to


more work there move on
describe the formation of aldehydes from the oxidation of
primary alcohols and the formation of ketones from the


oxidation of secondary alcohols
describe the reduction of aldehydes and ketones, e.g. using
or and the reaction of aldehydes and ketones


with HCN and KCN
describe the mechanism of the nucleophilic addition reactions


of hydrogen cyanide with aldehydes and ketones


 
describe the detection of carbonyl compounds by the use of


2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (2,4-DNPH) reagent
distinguish between aldehydes and ketones by testing with


Fehling’s solution and Tollens’ reagent
describe the reaction of compounds with alkaline
aqueous iodine to give tri-iodomethane, and a


carboxylate ion, RCOO~
deduce the presence of a CH3CH(OH)- group in an alcohol
from its reaction with alkaline aqueous iodine to form tri-

iodomethane
analyse an infrared spectrum of a simple molecule to identify 18.7
functional groups


devise a synthetic route (series of reactions) using any of the
Chapters
reactions from Chapters 14-18 to make a named organic 14-18


product.


 


 

images



P1.1 Introduction
The analytical skills of chemists are still important despite the development of new increasingly rapid and
sensitive instrumental techniques (Figure P1.1) (see Chapter 30). Your practical skills make an important


contribution to the grade you achieve in your chemistry qualification.


 


Figure P1.1: Chemist performing a titration.


 


Review of practical knowledge and understanding
In scientific investigations, we are often interested in finding out how one variable affects another. For
example, we might want to investigate a precipitation reaction to find out how the concentration of a
reactant affects the rate at which the precipitate forms. You might have seen the reaction between sodium
thiosulfate and dilute hydrochloric acid, which is a commonly investigated precipitation reaction. Sulfur is


the precipitate formed:


Na + 2NaCl(aq) + S(s) + +
This type of investigation involves changing only the variable under investigation (in this case the
concentration of a reactant) and keeping all other relevant variables constant. We can judge the effect of
changing the concentration by devising a way to measure how quickly the precipitate forms, such as timing


how long it takes for the solution to become opaque.
We now have the question we are investigating and the structure of the investigation in terms of its key


variables:
In a precipitation reaction, how does the concentration of a reactant affect the rate of precipitation (as


measured by the time it takes for the solution to become opaque)?
The independent variable is the one under investigation. This is changed systematically and we can


choose different values (in this case, the concentration of reactant).
The dependent variable is the one we measure to judge the effect of changing the independent


variable (in this case, the time it takes for the solution to become opaque).
The contro! variables are those that we must keep constant to ensure a fair test is carried out (in this


case, we should control the temperature and total volume of reactants used).
Note that we can express the question in this type of investigation generally as:


How does the independent variable affect the dependent variable?
When asked to plan and / or carry out an investigation, it is important that you state the question under
investigation clearly. You also need to list the independent, dependent and control variables before you


start writing down your proposed method or planning how to record and present your results.
The type of variable under investigation will determine whether you display the data collected in a table, as


a line graph or as a bar chart.
To decide which type of graph to draw, you need to know the difference between numerical value within
the range of results - and categoric continuous variables - which are described using words. We can
assume that the dependent variable is continuous, as it measures the effect of varying the independent
variable. Then if the independent variable is continuous, we draw a line graph. If the independent variable
is categoric, we draw a bar chart. So if you investigate the effect of temperature on rate of reaction, the
data can be presented as a line graph. If you investigate the rate of different metals reacting with dilute
acid, the data can be presented as a bar chart (as there are no values between those chosen for the


independent variable). See the graphs in Figure P1.2.
Rate / cm?


Rate /


 


 



Temperature / °C Zn Fe Al Mg Sn


(continuous variable) Type of metal (categoric variable)


Figure P1.2: A continuous independent variable a line graph; a categoric independent variable — a bar chart.


 
When sitting a Practical Skills examination, you will need to follow instructions to carry out an investigation
into an unknown substance or mixture of substances. Always read through all of the instructions before
carrying out the tests. Testing for unknown substances will require you to describe your observations in
detail. You will be able to refer to tables of tests for cations, anions and gases (see Appendix 3) to draw


your conclusions.
You will also carry out a quantitative task (based on measurements) as well as a qualitative task (based on
observations). Examples of problems that need you to collect quantitative data could be a titration (a


volumetric analysis) or an enthalpy change experiment.
The quantitative task will require you to read scales on measuring instruments such as burettes, measuring
cylinders, gas syringes and balances. For instruments with an analogue scale, such as a burette, you
should be able to read measurements to within half the value of the fine line divisions on the scale. So a
burette with fine line divisions every 0.10 cm? should be read to the nearest 0.05 A thermometer with


fine line divisions every 1 °C should be read to the nearest 0.5 °C (see Figure P1.3).
However, if a measuring instrument has very fine calibration (tightly grouped marks), it should be read to


the nearest calibrated mark.


Useful definitions to know, because you may need to decide upon or recognise these in a task, are:
Range: the minimum and maximum values for the independent or the dependent variable. For
example, in the rate of precipitation investigation, the range of the independent variable (the


concentration) might be 0.2 mol to 1.0 mol
Interval: the difference chosen between consecutive values of the independent variable. For example,
in the rate of precipitation investigation you might choose to test concentrations of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8

and 1.0 mol giving an interval of 0.2 mol
Anomalous result: a result that does not follow an established pattern.
Precise results: results in which each set of repeat readings are grouped closely together.
Accurate results: results that reflect the true value of a quantity.




value is 25.65 cm? + 0.05
eye must be level 26

with the bottom of
the meniscus (curved


surface at the top of


the solution) 27.


burette


value is 28.5°C + 0.5°C


 


thermometer


Figure P1.3: Taking readings from a magnified burette scale and a thermometer with an analogue scale.


 


Question
learner was investigating how temperature affects the rate of a reaction between magnesium and
dilute hydrochloric acid. The learner decided to measure the volume of gas given off in 30 seconds for

different temperatures of acid. She decided to use temperatures of 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 °C.

the independent variable.

b the dependent variable.

two control variables.


Give the range of the independent variable.


e What is the value of the interval chosen for the independent variable?
f Which type of graph would you use to display the results of a different investigation to find out


how different transition metal oxides affect the rate of a reaction?


P1.2 Manipulation, measurement and observation
In order to address a Practical Skills examination, you will need to master the expectations set out


throughout this chapter.


Expectations


Successful collection of data and observations


You should be able to:
set up apparatus correctly


follow instructions given in the form of written instructions or diagrams
use the apparatus to collect an appropriate quantity of data or observations, including subtle


differences in colour, solubility or quantity of materials
make measurements using pipettes, burettes, measuring cylinders, thermometers and other common


laboratory apparatus.
Quality of measurements or observations


You should be able to:


make accurate and consistent measurements and observations.
Decisions relating to measurements or observations

You should be able to:

decide how many tests or observations to perform
make measurements that span a range and have a distribution appropriate to the experiment

decide how long to leave experiments running before making readings

identify where repeated readings or observations are appropriate


replicate readings or observations as necessary


identify where confirmatory tests are appropriate and the nature of such tests


choose reagents to distinguish between given ions.


Points to remember
When describing a liquid or solution that is not coloured and is transparent, always use the word
‘colourless’. Some people make the mistake of just writing ‘clear’ - but a solution of sulfate is


clear (i.e. transparent) but blue in colour.
that appears white and opaque in a chemical test probably contains a fine suspension of a


white precipitate: for example, when using lime water to test for carbon dioxide gas.
When carrying out a titration, you should repeat the test until you have two titres that are within 0.1
cm3 of each other. Ideally you should be aiming for two concordant titres with the same values - but
judging the end-point can be tricky. That is why we carry out repeat sets of each test in many
investigations - to make our results more accurate by reducing experimental error. You can read more


about sources of error in Section P1.4.
Ina titration, the first titre measured is always a rough value to establish approximately where the
actual end-point lies. When obtaining subsequent values, you should be able to add the solution from


the burette one drop at a time near the end-point.
Sometimes a result is clearly incorrect. For example, it might be very different from the others in a
repeat set of readings or does not follow a well-established pattern in a series of tests. If you have
time, try it again. If not, discard it: do not include it in your calculation of the mean; ignore the

anomalous point when drawing a line of best fit on a graph.
When plotting a line graph of the data collected, a minimum of five values of the independent variable


(which is plotted along the horizontal axis) must be recorded to be confident of any pattern observed.
Note that it is possible to have precise results that are not particularly accurate. For example, if you
measure the mass of a product formed three times and the results are all the same, they are precise.
However, if the balance was not set to zero for any of the measurements, the mass will not be


accurate.


Question


2
carried out a titration four times and got results for the titre of 13.25, 12.95, 12.65 and


then 12.65 cm?. What is the most accurate value of the titre to use in any calculations?
b do we call a mixture of water and fine particles of an insoluble solid dispersed throughout


the liquid?
any similarities and differences you observe when looking at a test-tube of dilute sulfuric


acid and a test-tube of 0.05 mol copper(II) sulfate solution.
d the white precipitate formed in the test for carbon dioxide gas.
e Question 1 in Section P1.1, name a piece of apparatus the learner could use to measure:


i the independent variable


ii dependent variable.


P1.3 Presentation of data and observations


Expectations


Recording data or observations


You should be able to:


present numerical data, values or observations in a single table of results
draw up the table in advance of taking readings or making observations so that you do not have to


copy up your results
include in the table of results, if necessary, columns for raw data, for calculated values and for


analyses or conclusions
use column headings that include both the quantity and the unit and that conform to accepted


scientific conventions
record raw readings of a quantity to the same degree of precision and observations to the same level


of detail.


Display of calculation and reasoning


You should be able to:


show your working in calculations, and the key steps in your reasoning


use the correct number of significant figures for calculated quantities.


Data layout


You should be able to:
choose a Suitable and clear method to present the data, e.g. tables, graphs or a mixture of

presentation methods
select which variables to plot and decide whether a graph should be drawn as a straight line or a curve

plot appropriate variables on clearly labelled x- and y-axes


choose sensible scales for graph axes


plot all points or bars to an appropriate accuracy
follow the Association for Science Education (ASE) recommendations for putting lines on graphs (see


the ‘Points to remember’ referring to graphs, below).


Points to remember
There are certain conventions to observe when designing and drawing a table to use to record your
experimental data. Generally, the independent variable goes in the first column and the dependent
variable goes in the second column. Sometimes, if space on the page is an issue, a table can be
organised horizontally. In this case, the independent variable again goes first but at the start of the


first row in the table, with the dependent variable beneath it, not next to it as in a conventional table.
When recording quantitative data you will often need columns for repeat results and calculations of the
mean. This is achieved by subdividing the column for the dependent variable into the required number
of columns. For example, in the rate of precipitation investigation described at the beginning of this


chapter, the table to record three repeat readings and their means would be organised as:
Note that the headings in the table have their units included. You then do not need to record the units

for each entry you make in the table.
On graphs, always plot the independent variable along the horizontal (x-)axis and the dependent
variable up the vertical (y-)axis.



Draw the lines in tables and graphs in pencil, labelling the axes as in the corresponding table headings,


including their units.
In the table above, there could be an extra column on the right-hand side for values of the reciprocal of


1 This could be plotted


 


the mean time taken for the reaction mixture to become opaque (headed ‘
time
1
on a graph of against concentration to see how the rate of reaction varies with temperature (as


ime
rate is proportional to Gime’ so the greater the time, the slower the rate). See the graphs in Figure
Ame


P1.4.
Graph a


(negative curve)


 


 


 


Time for mixture to become opaque


Concentration / mol
   


    
Graph b
(positive
straight line)



 


 


Concentration / mol


Figure P1.4: Graphs that could be drawn from the data in a table using concentrations and mean times.


 
The labelled axes must be longer than half the size of the graph grid in both directions, selecting a


sensible scale (e.g. 1, 2, 5 or 10 units per 20 mm square on the grid: not 3 units).
Each point should be plotted as a small, neat x or + with a sharp pencil. The line drawn through the
points should not be ‘dot-to-dot’ but should be a line of best fit. This should be either drawn with a
ruler for a straight line or a smooth free-hand line for a curve. Think of the best-fit line as the ‘average’


line though the points.


Always show your working out in calculations.
Only give answers produced by calculation to correspond to the number of significant figures of the
least accurate experimental data used. So, if calculating a concentration using titre volumes such as
15.35 cm3, then the value of the concentration of the unknown solution can be given to 4 significant
figures (e.g. 1.244 or 0.9887 mol However, if the known concentration of one of the reactants is
given to three significant figures (e.g. 0.0250 mol or 0.200 mol then the calculated


concentration could be given to three significant figures.
When recording qualitative descriptions in a table, if there is ‘no change visible’, write that and do not


just put in a dash.


Question
In an experiment to find the enthalpy change of a reaction between two solutions, the mass of
solutions mixed together was 50.0 g and the temperature increased by 7.5 °C. The following equation


is used:
energy transferred = mass x


specific heat capacity x change in temperature
where the specific heat capacity of the solutions was taken as 4.18 J

the energy transferred in joules (J) to an appropriate number of significant figures.
b the number of significant figures chosen in part a.


P1.4 Analysis, conclusions and evaluation


Expectations


Interpretation of data or observations and identifying sources of error


You should be able to:
describe the patterns and trends shown by tables and graphs
describe and summarise the key points of a set of observations


find an unknown value by using co-ordinates or intercepts on a graph
calculate other quantities from data, or calculate the mean from replicate (repeat) values, or make

other appropriate calculations

determine the gradient of a straight-line graph

evaluate the effectiveness of control variables

identify the most significant sources of error in an experiment

estimate, quantitatively, the uncertainty in quantitative measurements


express such uncertainty in a measurement as an actual or percentage error


show an understanding of the distinction between systematic errors and random errors.


Drawing conclusions


You should be able to:
draw conclusions from an experiment, giving an outline description of the main features of the data,


considering whether experimental data support a given hypothesis, and making further predictions


draw conclusions from interpretations of observations, data and calculated values


make scientific explanations of the data, observations and conclusions that have been described.


Suggesting improvements


You should be able to:
suggest modifications to an experimental arrangement that will improve the accuracy of the


experiment or the accuracy of the observations that can be made


suggest ways in which to extend the investigation to answer a new question


describe such modifications clearly in words or diagrams.

Points to remember
To measure the gradient (slope) of a straight line on a graph, choose two points on the line at least half
as far apart as its total length. Then construct a right-angled triangle, as shown in Figure P1.5. The
gradient tells us the rate of change of y (the dependent variable) per unit change of x (the


independent variable):


change in y
gradient = -


change in x
read values


from the y-axis


    


 

   
in








read values


from the x-axis


 


xv
Figure P1.5: Finding the gradient of a straight-line graph. Choosing to construct a large triangle reduces the percentage


error in the values read from the axes, which are then used to calculate the gradient.


 
When evaluating the quality of the data collected, there are two types of error to consider: random
errors and systematic errors. Whenever we carry out an experiment, there are always errors involved.
They might be due to the person carrying out the experiment not reading the scale on a measuring
instrument correctly or choosing a measuring instrument with an inappropriate scale. These examples
of human error are equally likely to make the values of data too high or too low, so they are called
random errors. Repeating tests and taking the mean value helps to reduce the effect of random


errors.
However, other errors can result in consistently high or low values being recorded. These are called
systematic errors. Examples would be reading the volume of liquid in a burette to the upper level of
the liquid instead of to the bottom of the meniscus. It should be noted though that these consistently
high measurements of volume would not result in an incorrect value for the titre, because the final
volume is subtracted from the initial volume. Not ensuring the measuring instrument is correctly set on
zero is another example of a systematic error. If this is not corrected during an investigation, it can
result in consistently high or low masses being measured on balances. Other systematic errors can be
caused by errors when planning an investigation. This might result in data being collected that does
not really answer the question under investigation. For example, a control variable might not be kept
constant or taken into account, or the dependent variable chosen might not be a true measure of the
effect of varying the independent variable. An error such as this will make the data collected invalid


(incorrect).
You will have to estimate the error that is found in reading scales, as described at the beginning of this
chapter. In your evaluation of the experiment you should discuss the effect that these measurement
errors might have on the validity of the data and the conclusions you can draw from them. In the
example of a thermometer with 1 °C calibration marks, you can quote values to the nearest 0.5 °C.
The actual effect of this margin of error on confidence levels will depend on the magnitude of the
temperature being measured. When reading a low temperature of, say, 5.0 °C, plus or minus 0.5 °C
will have a bigger effect than when reading a higher temperature, such as 92.5 °C. For this reason it is


best to quote percentage errors, worked out using the equation:


margin of error x 100%


 
percentage error =


actual or mean measurement
In enthalpy change investigations, you often have to measure temperature differences. You can do this
by subtracting the final temperature from the initial temperature. In this case, using the thermometer
just described, the error would be plus or minus 1 °C, as the two 0.5 °C margins of error in both
readings should be added together. In this case, you should suggest increasing the temperature
change. For example, when evaluating enthalpies of combustion of alcohols by heating water in a
copper calorimeter, you could use a smaller volume of water to heat. However, this change would have
to be balanced against the increase in percentage error in measuring the smaller volume of water, to

see which gives the least percentage error overall.
You might need to suggest how to make your data from an experiment more accurate. For example, in
the rate of precipitation investigation, you could improve the accuracy of judging the time for the
reaction to reach a certain point in each test carried out. Whereas judging the moment when a pencil



mark can no longer be seen through the reaction mixture is subjective, you could use a light source
and light meter to make more objective judgements. You could stop the timer when the level of light
passing through the reaction mixture drops to the same level as measured by the light meter in each
test. This will make your repeat (or replicate) data more precise and improve the accuracy of your


results.
Your evaluation might lead beyond suggestions to change the method to ideas to investigate new
questions. For example, when evaluating the rate of precipitation, you will have tried to control the
temperature: probably by ensuring that both the solutions mixed started at the same temperature.
However, if the reaction is exothermic, this might cause the temperature to change between the
different concentrations investigated. This could lead to a new investigation to compare the energy
transferred in a precipitation reaction at different concentrations. The question could be phrased as


‘How does the concentration of a reactant solution affect the ... energy transferred in the reaction?’.
When drawing conclusions from investigations involving the manipulation of variables, you should refer
to your graph when commenting on the relationship between the independent and dependent
variables. You can explain your findings using the data and your scientific knowledge and


understanding.
When drawing conclusions from qualitative tests to identify an unknown substance, where possible, try


to carry out or suggest a further confirmatory test for the same substance (see Appendix 3).
Any hypotheses you test can only be refuted (disproved) by a practical investigation you carry out.
They cannot be proved because of the limitations of your investigation. So hypotheses can only be
‘supported’ by the data collected. Say that your hypothesis predicts that the rate of reaction increases
with increasing concentration, with a justification using collision theory, and then show how data
collected from your investigation supports this. You cannot say whether this relationship is true beyond
the range of concentrations tested. There might be a point using higher concentrations where
increasing the concentration of one reactant will start to have less, or even no, effect on the rate. This
could be because there is such an excess of one reactant that the rate of collisions with the other
reactant particles is not affected by further increases of concentration. This would now give you


another idea to test!


WORKED EXAMPLES


What is the percentage error in the case of the two temperatures 5 °C and 92.5 °C?

Solution
For the reading of 5 °C the percentage error will be:
0.5 x 100


whereas for 92.5 °C the percentage error is:


0.5 x 100
92.5


So there is a significant error in reading 5 °C compared with reading 92.5 °C.


= 0.54%


 


Question
4 A learner measured the average rate of a reaction by timing how long it took to collect 20 cm? of
the gas liberated in the reaction. What calculation would the learner do to work out the mean


(average) rate in
The learner finds that the rate of a reaction is directly proportional to the concentration of a


reactant, X.
i Sketch a graph to show this relationship.


ii how to work out the gradient of the line on the graph.
If the learner changed the concentration of X from 0.50 mol to 0.25 mol what


would happen to the rate of reaction?
c the quantitative relationship that the learner found in this investigation using your


scientific knowledge and understanding.


SUMMARY
In your practical examination, you will be expected to collect, record and analyse data so that you can answer


questions related to the two or three activities. You will need to develop the following practical skills.
Manipulation, measurement and observation:
successfully collect data and observations by setting up and carrying out experiments efficiently and safely
make precise and accurate measurements, as well as detailed observations
make decisions relating to measurements or observations, including the choice of equipment, the range and


interval of measurements, and the recognition of anomalous results.
Presentation of data and observations:
data or observations in tables and display data using appropriate graphs

e calculations and reasoning in tables and logical sequences.

Analysis, conclusions and evaluation:
e data or observations and identify sources of error, recognising systematic or random errors and

working out their significance


conclusions based on scientific knowledge and understanding

suggest improvements that can be made to improve the quality and validity of data collected.



 


2


3


 
A learner investigated the ease with which various metal carbonates decompose on heating. She
decided to heat equal masses of each carbonate and time how long it took for the carbon dioxide


given off to turn limewater in a test-tube cloudy.


 


 


 


 
1
aii Name the independent variable in the investigation.
1
ii Name the dependent variable.
1
iii Name the control variable described at the start of this question.
metal carbonate
limewater
The learner decided to repeat the test on each of five metal carbonates provided three
times.
[1]
i State why it is a good idea to collect replicate data in investigations.


[3]


ii table that the learner could fill in as the investigation was carried out.
c The test-tube contained 10 cm? of limewater. The learner measured this volume in
cm? measuring cylinder with calibration marks every 0.1 Give the margin
of error when reading this scale. State the percentage error in measuring the [2]


volume of limewater for this investigation.


[2]
1
Give the type of graph the learner should use to display the data from the investigation.


[Total: 12]


ii Explain what is likely to be the greatest source of error in this investigation.
The rate of the following reaction between hydrogen peroxide and iodide ions


can be monitored using sodium thiosulfate and starch indicator:

2H*(aq) + + > +
A mixture of starch solution, potassium iodide solution, sulfuric acid and sodium thiosulfate is
made. This mixture can then be reacted with varying concentrations of 10-volume hydrogen
peroxide, made by making measured volumes of the peroxide solution up to 25 cm? with distilled
water. When the hydrogen peroxide solution is added to the original mixture containing starch in a


flask, the time for the contents of the flask to turn a blue / black colour can be measured.
This procedure, using a range of volumes of hydrogen peroxide, can determine how the
concentration of hydrogen peroxide affects the rate of the reaction shown above. Here is a set of

results obtained from one such investigation.

Volume of hydrogen peroxide used / Time, t, for blue / black colour to appear


/s



 
A learner wants to use these results to draw a graph that will show how the
concentration of hydrogen peroxide affects the rate of reaction. Record the heading and
values that the learner could use to complete the third column of the table (to 2 [3]


significant figures).
b Give the name of the piece of measuring equipment they would use to make up the


volumes of hydrogen peroxide solution to 25 cm?.
The learner was provided with a stopclock (measuring to the nearest second) to
measure the time taken for the solution to turn blue / black. They then asked for a
stopwatch measuring to one-hundredth of a second. The teacher said that would not be [2]


necessary. Explain the teacher’s response.
original mixture was made up using a solution of 40 cm? of 0.10 mol 12]


potassium iodide. Calculate the number of moles of iodide ions in the reaction mixture.
[3]


[Total: 11]


e the role of the sodium thiosulfate in this investigation.


You have to identify an unknown compound, X.



To a 1 cm depth of X solution in a test tube, add | White ppt

the same volume of aqueous dilute ammonia

solution.


Then use a dropping pipette to add
concentrated ammonia solution to the mixture No change to ppt


in the test tube.
To 1 cm depth of X solution in a boiling tube, A gas is given off that turns damp red litmus paper
add aqueous sodium hydroxide and aluminium blue.


foil. Then heat the tube carefully.
To a 1 cm depth of X solution in a test tube, add | No change


the same volume of dilute hydrochloric acid.
Carefully heat the solid X in the test tube A brown gas is given off (nitrogen dioxide is a brown
provided. Note that two gases are released. gas). The mixture of gases re-lights a glowing splint.


The solid remains white as it is heated.

 
the results of the tests above, and the Tables of Qualitative Analysis notes in [1]

Appendix 3 at the back of the book, identify the cation present in X.




b how to confirm the cation present in X, giving the predicted observations.

[1]
the identity of X.
[Total: 4]


images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Work with another learner to draw a fully labelled reaction pathway diagram (energy profile


diagram) for an endothermic reaction.


Explain to another learner how this diagram shows that the reaction is endothermic.
Explain to another learner how to find the enthalpy change of combustion of an alcohol by
experiment. Then ask the other learner to explain to you how to reduce experimental errors in the


experiment that you chose.
Take it in turns to explain these terms to another learner: crystal lattice; bond energy; enthalpy


change; activation energy; standard conditions; standard enthalpy change of formation.
Work with another learner to write equations which represent:
enthalpy change of formation of calcium carbonate


the enthalpy change of combustion of ethane


the enthalpy change of neutralisation of sulfuric acid by sodium hydroxide.
Take turns in challenging a partner to write precise definitions of the enthalpy changes that are


represented by the symbols AH®, and
Check your definitions with those in Chapter 6 of the coursebook.
Explain to another learner the difference between average bond energies and exact bond energies.


Explain Hess’s law to another learner.
Ask another learner to select a combustion reaction from a textbook. Explain to the other learner
how to construct an enthalpy cycle to calculate the enthalpy change of combustion for this
reaction. Then reverse the process: you choose a simple reaction involving compounds and the
other learner explains how to construct an enthalpy cycle to calculate the enthalpy change of

reaction.

Ask another learner to select an example of an enthalpy cycle from Chapter 6 of the coursebook.


Explain to the other learner exactly how to calculate the required enthalpy change (remember to
take note of the stoichiometry of the reaction). Then reverse the process: you choose an enthalpy


cycle and the other learner explains.


INVESTIGATING THE STRUCTURE OF CRYSTALS

 
When water waves hit a barrier with a narrow slit in the middle of it, the waves behind the slit appear
to be curved. We say that the waves have been diffracted. The electrons in a crystal lattice can act like
a slit and X-rays can be diffracted by the crystal.


 
Figure 19.1: The X-ray diffraction pattern appears as a series of spots. We can determine the structure of a crystal


from the position of the spots.


 
When a beam of X-rays of one particular wavelength falls on a crystal, some X-rays pass straight
through the crystal but others are absorbed. The absorbed X-rays cause some electrons to become
‘excited’ and move to higher energy levels. When these electrons return to a lower energy level X-rays
are re-emitted (‘reflected’ again). These re-emitted X-rays are scattered in an orderly manner. The
scattered X-rays give rise to an interference pattern of spots which are recorded on a photographic
plate (Figure 19.1). The X-ray diffraction pattern is related to the pattern of the electrons in the solid
and the density of the electrons. A mathematical analysis of the X-ray pattern was first carried out by
William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg (Figure 19.2). From this analysis they were able to
deduce the pattern of electron density in the solid and hence identify the relative positions of the
electrons and atoms. These maps are similar to geographical contour maps (maps showing similar
heights joined by curved lines). From these maps it is possible to construct an accurate model of the


solid. Bond lengths can be determined to an accuracy of better than 1%.


 
Figure 19.2: William Henry Bragg developed X-ray diffraction to determine the structures of simple crystals. Dorothy


Hodgkin developed the method further to determine the structure of penicillin and insulin.


 
The calculations involved in translating the diffraction pattern into a model of the crystal structure are
extremely complicated. To determine even a simple structure such as sodium chloride requires a lot of


mathematical knowledge and many complex calculations.
Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e Suggest why the position of H atoms in compounds is not usually determined by X-ray diffraction.
e The first crystal structure to be determined by X-ray crystallography was zinc sulfide. This was
done over 100 years ago. The crystal structures of some proteins and DNA were determined 50
years later than this. Suggest why it took so much longer to determine the crystal structures of


proteins and DNA.


 


19.1 Defining lattice energy
When ions combine to form an ionic solid, there is a huge release of energy. The reaction is highly
exothermic. The energy given out when ions of opposite charges come together to form a crystalline lattice


is called the lattice energy,
Lattice energy is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of an ionic compound is formed from its gaseous ions

under standard conditions.
You can see equations describing the lattice energy of sodium chloride and magnesium chloride here.
Na*(g) + > = —787


+ > = —2526


Note that:


e it is the gaseous ions that combine to form the ionic solid
the lattice energy is always exothermic: the value of AH&, is always negative, because the definition


specifies the bonding together of ions, not the separation of ions.
The large exothermic value of the lattice energy shows that the ionic lattice is very stable with respect to


its gaseous ions. The more exothermic the lattice energy, the stronger the ionic bonding in the lattice.
It is impossible to determine the lattice energy of a compound by a single direct experiment. We can,
however, calculate a value for AH&, using several experimental values and an energy cycle called a Born-


Haber cycle. To do this, we first need to introduce two more types of enthalpy change.
Note that the quantity we have defined as lattice energy is more accurately called the lattice enthalpy.
However, the term ‘lattice energy’ is commonly applied to lattice enthalpy as well. Lattice energy is the
internal energy change when 1 mole of an ionic compound is formed from its gaseous ions at 298 K. Lattice


enthalpy values are very close to the corresponding lattice energy values.


IMPORTANT


 


Remember that the enthalpy change for lattice energy is always negative.


Question
Give values for the standard conditions of temperature and pressure.
b equations describing the lattice energy of:
i magnesium oxide

ii potassium bromide
sodium sulfide.



19.2 Enthalpy change of atomisation and electron

affinity

Enthalpy change of atomisation
The standard enthalpy change of atomisation of lithium relates to the equation:


Li(s) > Li(g) =
The standard enthalpy change of atomisation of chlorine relates to the equation:


Cl(g) = +122
Values of are always positive (endothermic). This is because energy must be supplied to break the


bonds holding the atoms in the element together.


Question
2 energy of the chlorine molecule is +244 kJ Why is the standard enthalpy change


of atomisation half this value?
b equations, including state symbols, that represent the enthalpy change of atomisation of:
i oxygen
ii


bromine.
is the numerical value of the enthalpy change of atomisation of helium? Explain your


answer.


Electron affinity
The energy change occurring when a gaseous non-metal atom accepts one electron is called the electron


affinity. The symbol for electron affinity is EA.
The first electron affinity, EA,, is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of electrons is added to 1 mole of


gaseous atoms to form 1 mole of gaseous ions with a single negative charge under standard conditions.


Equations representing the first electron affinity of chlorine and sulfur are:
Cl(g) + > EA, = kj
S(g) + > EA, = —200


Note that:
the change is from gaseous atoms to gaseous ions


e the enthalpy change for the first electron affinity, EA, is generally exothermic: EA, is negative.
When an element forms an ion with more than one negative charge, we must use successive electron
affinities (this is rather like the successive ionisation energies we used in Section 2.2). The first, second and

third electron affinities have symbols and EA3.
The equations representing the first and second electron affinities of oxygen are:


first electron affinity:
O(g) O-(g) EA, =


second electron affinity:

O-(g) + = +798
Note that second electron affinities are always endothermic is positive), and so are third electron


affinities.
The overall enthalpy change in forming an oxide ion, from an oxygen atom is found by adding


together the first and second electron affinities:
O(g) + > EA, + EA,
= (-141) + (+798)


+657


Trends in electron affinities
There is less experimental data about electron affinities compared with ionisation energies. For some
atoms the variation in the experimental data is considerable. Generally, electron affinities for non-metal
atoms get more negative (more exothermic) across a period with a maximum at Group 17 but the pattern
is not always clear. There is no clear pattern in electron affinities down many groups apart from Groups 16
and 17. Table 19.1 shows that here, there is a trend to less negative (less exothermic) electron affinities as


you go down the group, apart from the first member in the group.


Table 19.1: Selected electron affinities.


 


 
The value of the first electron affinity depends on the attraction between the added electron and the
positively charged nucleus. The stronger the attraction, the greater the amount of energy released. These
factors influencing the value of the electron affinity for Group 16 and 17 elements are the same as those


relating to first ionisation energy:
The greater the nuclear charge, the greater the attractive force between the nucleus and the outer
electrons. So chlorine, with a greater nuclear charge than sulfur, will tend to attract an electron more


readily. This means that more energy is released when a chlorine atom gains an electron.
The further away the outer shell electrons are from the positive nuclear charge, the less the attractive
force between the nucleus and the outer shell electrons is. Since the number of electron shells (and
the atomic radius) increases down Groups 16 and 17, the electron affinity decreases going from


chlorine to bromine to iodine.
The greater the number of electron shells, the greater the power of inner shell electrons to shield the
outer shell electrons from the nuclear charge. This also helps to decrease the electron affinity as you


go from chlorine to iodine.


IMPORTANT


Fluorine does not fit the trend. The electron affinity of a fluorine atom is lower than that of a chlorine
atom because the atomic radius of the fluorine atom is very small. The high electron density causes a
greater repulsion between the electrons within the atom. This greatly reduces the attractive effect


between the incoming electron and the nucleus.


 
Question


3 Suggest why the second and third electron affinities are always endothermic.
first electron affinity of sulfur is kJ The second electron affinity of sulfur is +640


kJ Calculate a value for the enthalpy change

S(g) +
c Write equations representing:



i the first electron affinity of iodine


ii the second electron affinity of sulfur.


Explain the trend in the first electron affinities going from sulfur to tellurium.


19.3 Born-Haber cycles


Components of the Born-Haber cycle
We have seen how we can apply law in energy cycles to work out enthalpy changes (Section


Born-Haber cycle is a particular type of energy cycle used to calculate lattice energy. In simple terms it can
be represented by Figure 19.3.
ionsin ionic
gaseous state compound


standard
enthalpy change


of formation, AH?
    


  
   


   
  
   
 
   


    
elements in their


standard states


   
Figure 19.3: A simple energy cycle that can be used to calculate lattice energy. The dashed line shows the two-step


route: using Hess’s law, AHP + =


 


We can determine the lattice energy of a compound if we know:


its enthalpy change of formation, AHP
the enthalpy changes involved in changing the elements from their standard states to their gaseous


ions,
According to law, Figure 19.3 shows that:
AH? + =


Rearranging this equation we get:


= —
IMPORTANT


When constructing Born-Haber cycles, remember:
1 atomise metal >
ionise metal >
atomise non-metal >


ionise non-metal >
for ionising metals you use ionisation energies and for ionising non-metals you use electron


affinities.


 

The enthalpy change AH® involves several steps.
Taking lithium fluoride as an example, the relevant enthalpy cycle can be written to show these steps
(Figure 19.4).


  


Li*(g) + |
  
  
   
  


  
step 4
\
Li*(g) + F(g) +
\
step 3 AH?
+


step 2


Li(g) ++
step 1


+
Figure 19.4: An energy cycle that can be used to calculate the lattice energy of lithium fluoride. The dashed line shows


the two-step route.


 


The enthalpy changes needed to calculate AH? are as follows.
Step 1: Convert solid lithium to gaseous lithium atoms: the enthalpy change required is the enthalpy


change of atomisation of lithium, AH§ .


Li(s) Li(g) =
Step 2: Convert gaseous lithium atoms to gaseous lithium ions: the enthalpy change required is the first


ionisation energy of lithium, IE; (see Section 2.2).


Li(s) > Li(g) + e7 IE, = +520



ep 3: Convert fluorine molecules to fluorine atoms: the enthalpy change required is the enthalpy change


f atomisation of fluorine, .


> F(g) = +79 kj
Step 4: Convert gaseous fluorine atoms to gaseous fluoride ions: the enthalpy change required is the first


electron affinity of fluorine,


F(g) EA, = —328 kJ


 
Step 5: By adding all these values together, we get a value for We can then calculate the lattice


energy using law.


The enthalpy change of formation of lithium fluoride is kJ


We now have all the information we need to calculate the lattice energy.
Calculating lattice energies


Applying law to find the lattice energy of lithium fluoride:



=
We know that:
AH? = AH§ [Li] + IE, [Li] + AH§ [F] + EA, [F]
Putting in the figures:
= (+161) + (+520) + (+79) + (—328) = +432


= — (+432) = kj
Note: take care to account for the signs of the enthalpy changes. The values of the enthalpy changes of


formation and the overall electron affinity may be negative or positive.


Question

4 Write equations to represent:

i the first ionisation energy of caesium

the third ionisation energy of aluminium

the enthalpy change of formation of calcium oxide
enthalpy change of formation of chloride.

Calculate the lattice energy for sodium chloride, given that:

[NaCl] = —411

[Na] = +107


[Cl] = +122 kJ


= +496


= —348


The Born-Haber cycle as an energy level diagram
We can show the Born-Haber cycle as an energy level diagram (Figure 19.5). This is the best, and clearest,
type of diagram for a Born-Haber cycle. You should therefore choose to draw this type of diagram to show


a Born-Haber cycle.
+ F(g)+
step +


k


 


step 4


+ F-(g)


 


step 2
Li(g) +


 


step 1


 


Li(s) +


 


step


AH?


 


LiF (s)


 


Figure 19.5: Born-Haber cycle for lithium fluoride.


 


To draw the cycle, you:
start by putting down the elements in their standard state on the left-hand side
add the other enthalpy changes in the order of steps 1 to 4 shown in Figure 19.5


complete the cycle by adding the enthalpy change of formation and lattice energy.
Note: the arrows going upwards represent an increase in energy (AH® is positive) and the arrows going


downwards represent a decrease in energy (AH® is negative).


IMPORTANT
When constructing Born-Haber cycles, remember that the elements go near the bottom on the left-

hand side and you atomise and ionise the metal first then atomise and ionise the non-metal.




Question
5 Drawa fully labelled Born-Haber cycle for potassium bromide, naming each step.
b the name of the enthalpy changes represented by the following equations:

+ +


+ >


+ >


The Born-Haber cycle for magnesium chloride


The Born-Haber cycle for magnesium chloride is shown in Figure 19.6.
Mg?*(g) +
x


2AH & | Mg?*(g) + Cl,(g)+


 


 


2EA,


Mg?*(g) +


 


+ +


 



 
+ Cl,(g)


+


 
AH,


MgCl,(s)


 


Figure 19.6: Born-Haber cycle for magnesium chloride.


 


There are a few differences between this cycle and the one for lithium fluoride.


1 The magnesium ion is Mg2*, so the first and the second ionisation energies need to be taken into
account:
Mg(g) Mg*(g) + IE, = +736


Mg*(g) > + IE2 = +1450
2 There are two chloride ions in so the values of the enthalpy change of atomisation and the first


electron affinity of chlorine must be multiplied by 2.
= 2 x (+122)
= +244
+ > = 2 x


= —696 kj
In order to calculate the lattice energy, we need some additional information:


= —641


[Mg] = +148


According to Hess’s law:
= — [Mg] + IE, [Mg] + [Mg] +


[Cl] +
= — {(+148) + (+736) + (+1450) +


2 x (+122) + 2 x (—348)}

= — (+1882) = —2523


Question
6 fully labelled Born-Haber cycles for:
a MgO


Constructing a Born-Haber cycle for aluminium oxide


Note: this section about the Born-Haber cycle for is extension work. You will only be asked to


construct and do calculations involving ions with one or two positive or negative charges.


 


Aluminium oxide, contains two aluminium ions and three oxide ions
to form 1 mole of gaseous ions from 1 mole of Al(s), we apply the following sequence of


enthalpy changes:
IE, IE, IE,
Al(s) Al(g) —> —>


mol! mol! +1820kJ mol!


 
to form 1 mole of gaseous ions from oxygen molecules, we apply the following sequence


of enthalpy changes:
EA, EA,
— — —


kJ +798 kJ mol!


Question


Note: Question 7 is extension content.


7 Drawa Born-Haber cycle for aluminium oxide.
a value for the lattice energy of aluminium oxide using the data under the arrows in the
sequences above and given that = —1676 Remember that there are 2 moles


of ions and 3 moles of O27 ions in 1 mole of Al,03.


Factors affecting the value of lattice energy
Lattice energy arises from the electrostatic force of attraction of oppositely charged ions when the


crystalline lattice is formed. The size and charge of these ions can affect the value of the lattice energy.


Lattice energy and ion size
As the size of the ion increases, the lattice energy becomes less exothermic. This applies to both anions

and cations. Figure 19.7 shows that:
for any given anion, e.g. F~, the lattice energy gets less exothermic as the size of the cation increases
from Lit to Cs*



Lit @
4

+
Na* O

a>

£ Kt

Rb

Cs*





L


 


Figure 19.7: Lattice energies of the Group 1 halides.


 
e for any given cation, e.g. Li*, the lattice energy gets less exothermic as the size of the anion increases


from
lons with the same ionic charge have a lower charge density if their radius is larger. This is because the
same charge is spread out over a larger volume. A lower charge density results in weaker electrostatic
forces of attraction in the ionic lattice. Sodium fluoride has a less exothermic lattice energy than lithium


fluoride. This reflects the lower charge density on sodium ions compared with lithium ions.


Lattice energy and the charge on ions


The lattice energy becomes more exothermic as the ionic charge increases.
We can see this by comparing lithium fluoride, LiF, with magnesium oxide, MgO. These compounds have
the same arrangement of ions in their lattice structure. The cations Lit and have similar sizes. The
anions F~ and are fairly similar in size (although they are much larger than the cations). The major


physical difference between LiF and MgO is the ionic charge. This affects the lattice energy:
[LiF] = —1049


[MgO] = —3923
Magnesium oxide has a greater lattice energy than lithium fluoride. The doubly charged and ions
in magnesium oxide attract each other more strongly than the singly charged ions of the same size in LiF.
For ions of similar size, the greater the ionic charge, the higher the charge density. This results in stronger


ionic bonds being formed.


IMPORTANT
The value of the lattice energy depends on the size of the ions and the charge on the ion. The lattice


energy is higher if the ionic charge is greater and the ionic radius is smaller.

 


Questions
8 pair of compounds, suggest which will have the most exothermic lattice energy.
i KCI and (ionic radii are similar)
and


CaO and NaCl (ionic radii are similar).


the following compounds in order of increasingly exothermic lattice energy. Explain your


answer.


LiF RbCl


Note: Question 9 is extension conte


9 taking Physics A Level learn that the electrostatic force between two charged particles is
proportional to where Q, and are the charges on the particles and the distance


r
between the centres of the particles.
Use this relationship to explain why:


oxide has a greater lattice energy than lithium fluoride


fluoride has a greater lattice energy than potassium bromide.
10 Which one of these equations for the calculation of the lattice energy of sodium oxide, is


correct?
= — [Na] + IE, [Na] +


+ EA; +
= — [Na] + [Na] +


+
C = — [Na] [Na] +


[O] + [O]}
= — [Na] + [Na] +


[O] + EA; +


lon polarisation
In our model of an ionic lattice, we have thought of the ions as being spherical in shape. This is not always
the case. In some cases, the positive charge on the cation in an ionic lattice may attract the electrons in
the anion towards it. This results in a distortion of the electron cloud of the anion and the anion is no longer
spherical (Figure 19.8). We call this distortion ion polarisation. The ability of a cation to attract electrons


and distort an anion is called the polarising power of the cation.


Figure 19.8: lon polarisation. A small highly charged cation can distort the shape of the anion.


 
Factors affecting ion polarisation


The degree of polarisation of an anion depends on:


e the charge density of the cation
the ease with which the anion can be polarised: its polarisability.


An anion is more likely to be polarised if:
the cation is small
e the cation has a charge of 2+ or 3+
the anion is large

the anion has a charge of 2— or 3-.
A small highly charged cation such as Fe?* can attract electrons and distort a larger anion to such an
extent that the bond formed has a considerable amount of covalent character. Pure ionic bonding and pure



covalent bonding are extremes. Many ionic compounds have some covalent character due to ion
polarisation. Many covalent compounds have some degree of charge separation, i.e. they are polar, due to


bond polarisation (see Chapter 4).
Question


Explain why a cation with a smaller ionic radius has a higher charge density.
b one of the following ions will be the best polariser of the large nitrate ion? Explain your


answer.
Li* kt


one of these ions will be most polarised by a Mg2* ion? Explain your answer.



The thermal stability of Group 2 carbonates and nitrates
The Group 2 carbonates decompose to their oxides and carbon dioxide on heating. For example:


CaCO3(s) +
Table 19.2 shows the decomposition temperature and enthalpy change of reaction, AH®, for some Group 2


carbonates.


 


Table 19.2: Enthalpy change of reaction values for the decomposition of some Group 2 carbonates.


 
The relative ease of thermal decomposition is shown by the values of the enthalpy changes of reaction.
The more positive the enthalpy change, the more stable the carbonate relative to its oxide and carbon
dioxide. You can also see this in the decomposition temperatures: the further down the group, the higher


the temperature required to decompose the carbonate (see Section 11.4).
So, the relative stabilities of these carbonates increase down the group in the order:
BaCO3 > SrCO3 > CaCO3 > MgCO3.


We can explain this trend using ideas about ion polarisation:
the carbonate ion has a relatively large ionic radius so it is easily polarised by a small highly charged
cation
the Group 2 cations increase in ionic radius down the group:
< < <
the ionic radius of the cation, the better it is at polarising the carbonate ion (Figure 19.9)
so the degree of polarisation of the carbonate ion by the Group 2 cation follows the order


> > Sr2+ > Ba2*
the greater the polarisation of the carbonate ion, the easier it is to weaken a carbon-oxygen bond in


the carbonate and form carbon dioxide and the oxide on heating.


 


Figure 19.9: Magnesium ions are better polarisers of carbonate ions than calcium ions.


 
A similar pattern is observed with the thermal decomposition of Group 2 nitrates: these decompose to form


the oxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxygen. For example:
2MgO(s) + +
The order of stability with respect to the products is in the order:


> > >
The difference in thermal stability of Group 2 carbonates can be analysed by comparing Born-Haber cycles
involving the lattice energies of calcium carbonate and calcium oxide. The unequal changes in the lattice
energies of the Group 2 carbonates and the Group 2 oxides as the cation size increases can be related to


the increasing thermal stability down the group.

Question
12 Use ideas about ion polarisation to explain why magnesium nitrate undergoes thermal decomposition
at a much lower temperature than barium nitrate.


19.4 Enthalpy changes in solution
When an ionic solid dissolves in water, the crystal lattice breaks up and the ions separate. It needs a large
amount of energy to overcome the attractive forces between the ions. How does this happen, even when


the water is not heated? We will answer this question in this section.


Enthalpy change of solution
The standard enthalpy change of solution, is the energy absorbed or released when 1 mole of


an ionic solid dissolves in sufficient water to form a very dilute solution.
The enthalpy changes of solution for magnesium chloride and sodium chloride are described by the


equations below:


+ aq = —55 kj



or
+ aq > Mg?*(aq) + = —55
+ NaCl(aq) = +3.9 kj
or
+ aq > + = +3.9


Note that:


the symbol for enthalpy change of solution is


sol
the symbol ‘aq’ represents the very large amount of water used


enthalpy changes of solution can be positive (endothermic) or negative (exothermic)
* acompound is likely to be soluble in water only if is negative or has a small positive value;

substances with large positive values of are relatively insoluble.


Question
Write equations to represent the enthalpy change of solution of:
i potassium sulfate


ii chloride.
The enthalpies of solution of some metal halides are given below. What do these values tell you


about the relative solubilities of these four compounds?


sodium chloride, = +3.9 kJ


sol
silver chloride, = +65.7
sodium bromide, = —0.6


silver bromide, = +84.5 kj
‘Soluble’ and ‘insoluble’ are only relative terms. We think of magnesium carbonate as being insoluble
because only 0.6 g of the salt dissolves in every dm? of water. No metallic salts are absolutely insoluble in
water. Even lead carbonate, which is regarded as insoluble, dissolves to a very small extent: 0.00017 g


dissolves in every dm? of water. If salts were completely insoluble, they could not have a value for


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 19.1


 


Enthalpy change of solution by experiment


SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
The enthalpy change of solution of sodium hydroxide can be found using a polystyrene cup as a
calorimeter. We use known amounts of solute and solvent with the solvent in excess to make sure that


all the solute dissolves.
Procedure
1 Weigh an empty polystyrene cup.


2 Pour 100 cm? of water into the cup and weigh the cup and water.
3 Record the steady temperature of the water with a thermometer reading to at least the nearest 0.2


4 Add a few pellets of sodium hydroxide (corrosive!) which have been stored under dry conditions.
5 Keep the mixture stirred continuously with a thermometer and record the temperature at fixed


intervals, e.g. every 20 seconds.


6 Keep recording the temperature for 5 minutes after the maximum temperature has been reached.


7 Weigh the cup and its contents to calculate the mass of sodium hydroxide which dissolved.


Specimen results and calculations
mass of polystyrene cup =
mass of polystyrene cup + water =
mass of water = 100.45 g
mass of cup + water + sodium hydroxide = 124.95 g
mass of sodium hydroxide that dissolved = 1.50g
initial temperature of water = 18.0 °C
final temperature of water = 21.6 °C


temperature rise = +3.6 °C
From the results, 1.50 g of sodium hydroxide dissolved in 100.45 cm? (100.45 g) of water and


produced a temperature change of +3.6 °C.
energy change, q = — mass of water (in g) x specific heat capacity x temperature change (in


°C)
—(100.45 x 4.18 x 3.6)


—1511.57 J = (to 2 significant figures)
The energy change for 1.5 g sodium hydroxide is —1.5 kJ


The enthalpy change for 1.0 mole of sodium hydroxide (M, = 40 g
is x = kj


15


= —40



In this experiment, we are assuming that the specific heat capacity of the solution is the same as the
specific heat capacity of water. The heat losses in this experiment, however, are likely to be
considerable because the sodium hydroxide takes some time to dissolve. This means that the reaction


mixture has a longer period of cooling.


 

Enthalpy change of hydration
The lattice energy for sodium chloride is —788 This means that we need to supply (at least) +788
kJ to overcome the forces of attraction between the ions. But [NaCl] is only +3.9
Where does the energy needed to separate the ions come from? The answer is that it comes from the
strong attraction between the ions and the water molecules.



When an ionic solid dissolves in water, bonds are formed between water molecules and the ions. These
bonds are called ion-dipole bonds. Water is a polar molecule. The oxygen atoms in water molecules
are attracted to the positive ions in the ionic compound. The 6+ hydrogen atoms in water molecules are


attracted to the negative ions in the ionic compound (Figure 19.10).
The energy released in forming ion-dipole bonds is sufficient to compensate for the energy that must be


put in to separate the anions and cations that are bonded together in the crystal lattice.
a 5+
bond between forming
ions weakens | |
H—O,,
bonds
formed
HOt





H


 


lattice of ions


Figure 19.10: a Water molecules forming ion-dipole bonds with an ionic compound. b Hydrated ions in solution.


 
The energy released when gaseous ions dissolve in water is called the standard enthalpy change of


hydration.
The enthalpy change of hydration, is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of a specified gaseous ion


dissolves in sufficient water to form a very dilute solution.


The enthalpy changes of hydration for calcium ions and chloride ions are described by the equations below:
+ aq >
+ aq > Cl-(aq)


Note:
the symbol for enthalpy change of hydration is


e the enthalpy change of hydration is always exothermic
the value of is more exothermic for ions with the same charge but smaller ionic radii, e.g. is
more exothermic for than for The charge density is greater for lithium than for sodium
because the ionic radius of Li* is smaller and there is less shielding than for Na*. This effect is greater
than the effect of increased nuclear charge present in Na*. Water is a polar molecule. So ion-dipole


attractions between water and Li* are stronger than ion-dipole attractions between water and

the value of is more exothermic for ions with the same radii but a larger charge, e.g. is

more exothermic for than for Lit. The charge density is greater for magnesium than for lithium
because the charge on Mg?* is greater for the same size of atom. There are also a greater number of


positive charges in the nucleus. So ion-dipole attractions between water and are stronger than


ion-dipole attractions between water and Lit.
Questions
14 Why is the enthalpy change of hydration always exothermic?
b equations to represent:
i the hydration of a sodium ion
hydration of a chloride ion.
c diagrams to show:


i four water molecules hydrating a magnesium ion


ii two water molecules hydrating a bromide ion.


Show the dipole on each water molecule.
why the value of for magnesium ions is much more exothermic than for


potassium ions.
15 Name the changes associated with the equations below:
KBr(s) + aq > KBr(aq) (for 1 mole of KBr)
+ aq > K*(aq) (for 1 mole of K* ions)


+ > KBr(s) (for 1 mole of KBr)


+ aq > (for 1 mole of ions)


Calculating enthalpy changes in solution
We can calculate the enthalpy change of solution or the enthalpy change of hydration by constructing an


energy cycle and using Hess’s law (Figure 19.11).


gaseous ions


enthalpy change of


lattice energy
      
  
 


 


ionic solid


enthalpy change


 
hydration of cation of solution


and anion,


 
ions in aqueous


solution


 


 


 


Figure 19.11: a An energy cycle involving lattice energy, enthalpy change of hydration and enthalpy change of solution.


 
We can see from this energy cycle that:


+ =
Note that the values for both anions and cations are added together to get the total value of


We can use this energy cycle to calculate:


the value of


value of


REFLECTION
Work with another learner to make a list of differences between the standard enthalpy change of


hydration and standard enthalpy change of solution.
Work with another learner to list and define each of the different enthalpy changes that you need


in order to calculate the lattice energy of an ionic compound. When constructing a Born-Haber


cycle, what is the best order for these enthalpy changes?
Did you leave out any enthalpy changes? If so, what strategies will you take in order to remember


these?


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
the enthalpy change of solution of sodium fluoride using the following data:
lattice energy = —902


enthalpy change of hydration of sodium ions = —406

enthalpy change of hydration of fluoride ions = —506 kj
Solution
Step 1: Draw the energy cycle (Figure 19.12)


 


 
=


Na*(g) +


 


 


 


 
   


  


 


[Na*]



= -506kJ


 


Na*(aq) +


 


 


 


Figure 19.12: An energy cycle to determine of NaF.


 
Step 2: Rearrange the equation and substitute the figures to find
+ =
so
= —


[NaF] = (—406) + (—506) — (—902)
[NaF] = k}


An energy level diagram for this energy cycle is shown in Figure 19.13.


Na*(g) +


 


 
(NaF) +
(Na*)
kJ


NaF(s)


NaF(aq)


 


Figure 19.13: An energy level diagram to determine of NaF.


 
the enthalpy change of hydration of the chloride ion using the following data.
lattice energy of lithium chloride = —846


enthalpy change of solution of lithium chloride = —37


enthalpy change of hydration of lithium ion = —519 kj
Solution


Step 1: Draw the energy cycle (Figure 19.14).


Li*(g) +


 


 
(LiCl)
= -846 kJ
+
=?

(LiCl)
= -37kJ mol!


LiCl(aq)


 


 


Figure 19.14: An energy cycle to determine [CI7].


 
Step 2: Rearrange the equation and substitute the figures to find [CI7].


+ = [Lit] + [CI7]


so
= AH&, + AHS, — [Li*]
= (—846) + (-519)


= —364


 


Questions
16 energy cycle to calculate the enthalpy of hydration of magnesium ions when magnesium


chloride dissolves in water.
the enthalpy of hydration of magnesium ions given that:
= —2592


= —55 kj


= kJ


The solubility of Group 2 sulfates
Table 19.3 shows the solubility in water of some Group 2 sulfates. The solubility decreases as the radius of
the metal ion increases. We can explain this variation in solubility in terms of the relative values of


enthalpy change of hydration and the corresponding lattice energy.
magnesium sulfate 1.83


calcium sulfate 4.66 x 10-2
strontium sulfate 7.11 x


barium sulfate 9.43 x 10-6


Table 19.3: Solubilities in water of some Group 2 sulfates.


 


 


Change in hydration enthalpy down the group
Smaller ions (with the same charge) have greater enthalpy changes of hydration
so the enthalpy change of hydration decreases (gets less exothermic) in the order:


Mg?* > >
this decrease is relatively large down the group and it depends entirely on the increase in the size of


the cation, as the anion is unchanged (it is the sulfate ion in every case).


Change in lattice energy down the group
Lattice energy is greater if the ions (with the same charge) forming the lattice are small
so the lattice energy decreases in the order:
> Ca?* > >
e the lattice energy is also inversely proportional to the sum of the radii of the anion and cation


e the sulfate ion is much larger than the Group 2 cations
so the sulfate ion contributes a relatively greater part to the change in the lattice energy down the


group
so the decrease in lattice energy is relatively smaller down the group and it is determined more by the


size of the large sulfate ion than the size of the cations.


Difference in enthalpy change of solution of Group 2 sulfates
Earlier in this section we saw that substances that have a very low solubility in water are likely to have

with a high positive (endothermic) value. As a rough guide, the higher the positive value of the
sol


less soluble the salt.


 


 


 


 


 
+ +

+
2-



SrSOa(s)
[CaSO,
sol


calcium sulfate strontium sulfate


Figure 19.15: Enthalpy cycles comparing the enthalpy change of solution of calcium sulfate and strontium sulfate.


 
We have seen that:
the lattice energy of the sulfates decreases (gets less exothermic) by relatively smaller values down

the group
the enthalpy change of hydration decreases (gets less exothermic) by relatively larger values down the

group


so applying Hess’s law, the value of AHS, gets more endothermic down the group (Figure 19.15)


so the solubility of the Group 2 sulfates decreases down the group.


Questions
a_ enthalpy cycle as an energy level diagram showing the relationship between lattice


energy, enthalpy change of solution and enthalpy change of hydration for barium sulfate.


is very endothermic.
b why magnesium sulfate is more soluble than barium sulfate by referring to the relative


values of the lattice energies and enthalpy changes of hydration.


SUMMARY
The lattice energy is the energy change when gaseous ions come together to form 1 mole of a solid lattice


(under standard conditions).
The standard enthalpy change of atomisation (AHG ) is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of gaseous atoms is


formed from the element in its standard state under standard conditions.
The first electron affinity is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of electrons is added to 1 mole of gaseous


atoms to form 1 mole of gaseous ions with a single negative charge under standard conditions.
A Born-Haber cycle is a type of enthalpy cycle (Hess cycle) that includes lattice energy, enthalpy change of

formation and relevant electron affinities, enthalpy changes of atomisation and enthalpy changes of ionisation.
The thermal stability of the carbonates and nitrates of Group 2 elements depends on the degree to which the Group

2 cation is able to polarise the larger anion:


smaller cations have a higher charge density and are better polarisers of a given anion


larger anions are more polarised by a given cation.
The standard enthalpy change of solution is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of an ionic solid dissolves in


sufficient water to form a very dilute solution. may be exothermic or endothermic.
The enthalpy change of hydration is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of gaseous ions dissolves in sufficient


water to form a very dilute solution. is always exothermic.
law can be applied to construct energy cycles to determine enthalpy changes of solution and enthalpy


changes of hydration.
The decrease in solubility of Group 2 sulfates down the group can be explained in terms of the relative values of the

enthalpy change of hydration and the corresponding lattice energy.



 


 


1


2


4


The table shows the enthalpy changes needed to calculate the lattice energy of potassium oxide,



first ionisation energy of potassium
first electron affinity of oxygen
second electron affinity of oxygen


enthalpy change of formation of


enthalpy change of atomisation of potassium +89

IMPORTANT
Learn a mental check list to help you construct Born-Haber cycles:

have | included the enthalpy of formation?


have | included both enthalpies of atomisation?


have | converted all atoms into ions of the correct charge?


have | considered how many moles of each ion are in 1 mole of the compound?
The last two points get forgotten most often, especially the final one. This final point is


important in Question 1, parts a and b, Question 3, part b ii, and Question 4, part c.
the incomplete Born-Haber cycle shown below. On the lines A to E of your copy of


the Born-Haber cycle, write the correct symbols relating to potassium and oxygen.


lattice energy


of
A


2K(s) +3 O2(g)
enthalpy change
of formation


of


 


 


 


K20(s)


 


the data in the table above to calculate the lattice energy of potassium oxide.
c how, and explain why, the lattice energy of sodium oxide differs from that of


potassium sulfide,


Explain why the second electron affinity of oxygen has a positive value.


 


[5]


[2]
[4]


[1]


[Total: 12]
The lattice energy of sodium chloride can be calculated using the following enthalpy


changes:


enthalpy change of formation of sodium chloride


enthalpy changes of atomisation of sodium and chlorine


first ionisation energy of sodium


first electron affinity of chlorine.


Define the terms:
i first ionisation energy
ii enthalpy change of atomisation.


Draw and label a Born-Haber cycle to calculate the lattice energy of sodium chloride.
Explain why the lattice energy of sodium chloride has a value that is lower than the


lattice energy of lithium chloride.
[3]
[2]


[4]


[2]


[Total: 11]


an energy cycle to show the dissolving of magnesium iodide in water.


table shows the values for all but one of the enthalpy changes relevant to this cycle.


Enthalpy change
enthalpy change of hydration of Mg2+ ion


enthalpy change of hydration of ion


i Define enthalpy change of hydration.


 
ii Use the values in the table to calculate the value for the enthalpy change of


solution of magnesium iodide.


c a diagram to show how water molecules are arranged around a magnesium ion.
why the enthalpy change of hydration of a magnesium ion is more exothermic


than the enthalpy change of hydration of a sodium ion.


[5]


[2]
[3]


[2]


[3]


[Total: 15]
The lattice energy of magnesium bromide, can be calculated using the


enthalpy changes shown in the table.
Type of enthalpy change
first ionisation energy of magnesium
second ionisation energy of magnesium


first electron affinity of bromine
enthalpy change of formation of
enthalpy change of atomisation of magnesium


enthalpy change of atomisation of bromine
the meaning of the terms:
i lattice energy


ii second ionisation energy.
Draw and label a Born-Haber cycle to calculate the lattice energy of magnesium


bromide.


Calculate the lattice energy of magnesium bromide.


 
[2]


[3]
[4]


[2]


[Total: 11]
each of the following pairs of compounds, state, with reasons, which one you


would expect to have the higher lattice energy.

i NaCl and KBr
[2]



SrS. [2]
some crystal lattices, some of the ions are polarised.


i State the meaning of the term ion polarisation. [2]
ii Explain why a magnesium ion is better than a sodium ion at polarising an iodide


ion. [2]
Use ideas about ion polarisation to explain why barium carbonate is more stable to


thermal decomposition than magnesium carbonate. [3]


[Total: 11]


6 The diagram shows the enthalpy changes when sodium chloride is dissolved in water.


Na*(g) +


 


 
A B
enthalpy
Na*(aq) +

Define the following terms:
enthalpy change of solution [2]


enthalpy change of hydration. [2]


b symbol equations that describe the following:
enthalpy change of solution of sodium chloride [2]
enthalpy change of hydration of the chloride ion. [2]


c Name the enthalpy changes labelled A, B and C. [3]
Draw the water molecules around magnesium ions and sulfate ions in a solution of


magnesium sulfate. [3]
e Explain, in terms of differences of lattice energies and enthalpy changes of hydration,


why magnesium sulfate is more soluble in water than calcium sulfate. [5]


[Total: 19]


SELF-EVALUATION


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


Ican section... more work there move on
define and use the terms enthalpy change of atomisation and
19.1, 19.2


lattice energy


define and use the term first electron affinity
explain the factors affecting the electron affinities of the


elements


describe and explain the trends in the electron affinities of the


Group 16 and Group 17 elements

construct and use Born-Haber cycles for ionic solids
carry out calculations involving Born-Haber cycles
explain the effect of ionic charge and ionic radius on the 19.3
magnitude (big or small) of the lattice energy
define and use the terms enthalpy change of hydration and 19.4
enthalpy change of solution
construct and use an energy cycle involving enthalpy change 19.4
of solution, lattice energy and enthalpy changes of hydration
carry out calculations using an energy cycle involving enthalpy
change of solution, lattice energy and enthalpy changes of 19.4

hydration
explain the effect of ionic charge and ionic radius on the 19.4
magnitude (big or small) of the enthalpy change of hydration


describe and explain qualitatively, the trend in the thermal
stability of the nitrates and carbonates in Group 2, including 19.4

the effect of ionic radius on the polarisation of the large anion


describe, and explain qualitatively, the variation in solubility
and enthalpy change of solution of the hydroxides and sulfates 19.4
in Group 2 in terms of relative magnitudes of enthalpy change

of hydration and the lattice energy.



images


 


In this chapter you will learn how to:
predict the identity of the substance liberated during electrolysis from:
e the state of electrolyte (molten or aqueous)


the position of the ions (in the electrolyte) in the redox series (electrode potential)


the concentration of the ions in the electrolyte
state and apply the relationship F = Le between the Faraday constant, F, the Avogadro constant, L, and the charge

on the electron, e

calculate:

e the quantity of charge passed during electrolysis using Q = It


e the mass and / or volume of substance liberated during electrolysis
describe the determination of a value of the Avogadro constant by an electrolytic method


define the terms:


e standard electrode (reduction) potential


standard cell potential
describe the standard hydrogen electrode
describe methods used to measure the standard electrode potentials of:


e metals or non-metals in contact with their ions in aqueous solution


ions of the same element in different oxidation states
calculate a standard cell potential by combining two standard electrode potentials
use standard cell potential to:
e deduce the polarity of each electrode and hence explain / deduce the direction of electron flow in the external
circuit of a simple cell
predict the feasibility of a reaction
deduce from standard electrode potential values the relative reactivity of elements, compounds and ions as
oxidising agents or reducing agents
construct redox equations using the relevant half-equations
predict qualitatively how the value of an electrode potential varies with the concentration of the aqueous ion
0.059. [oxidised species]
+
[reduced species]


potential varies with the concentration of the aqueous ions.


use the Nernst equation = to predict quantitatively how the value of an electrode


BEFORE YOU START
Explain to another learner the meaning of the terms reversible reaction, equilibrium and Le


Chatelier’s principle.
Make a list of the factors that affect an equilibrium reaction. Choose an equilibrium reaction from
Chapter 8 in the coursebook and work with another learner to suggest how these factors affect the


position of that particular equilibrium.
Work with another learner. Take it in turns to explain the meaning of the terms electrolysis, anode,
cathode, electrolyte, anion and cation. If you do not agree or are not sure, check with a textbook or


the internet.
Make a list of compound ions (e.g. SO32~) or compounds (e.g Share this list with
another learner, then deduce the oxidation number of the metal in the ion or more electropositive


non-metal in the compound. Compare your answers with the other learner.
Take turns in challenging another learner to define these terms: redox, oxidation, reduction,
disproportionation, oxidation number, oxidising agent and reducing agent. If you do not agree or


are not sure, check your answers with the definitions given in the coursebook.
Explain to another learner the meaning of the terms Avogadro constant, standard conditions and


mole.
Ask another learner to write down an unbalanced ion-electron equation (half equation) from
Appendix 2 of the coursebook but without including the electron(s), e.g. O2 + 4H* > The
equation can be written either as shown or reversed. You then have to balance the equation. Do
this by adding electrons to one or other side of the equation so that it balances. Then reverse the
process: you select the equation and the other learner balances it. Continue until you are sure that


you can balance these equations.

 
GETTING RID OF THE POISONS


 
Figure 20.1: This land has been contaminated by poisonous ions such as cadmium ions and cyanide ions. We can


use electrochemistry to remove these ions.


 
In many places in the world, the land once occupied by old chemical industries, gasworks or fertiliser
factories cannot be built on. This is because the ground is polluted with poisonous substances such as
cadmium ions, copper ions, Cu2*, or cyanide ions, CN~ (Figure 20.1). Some countries have laws
to prevent these ‘brown field sites’ from being used until the poisons have been removed.


Electrochemistry can be used to remove some of these pollutants from the soil (Figure 20.2).
The surface of soil particles can be positively or negatively charged. Sometimes both charges are
present on the surface of a single particle. The surface of negatively charged soil particles can attract
positive ions such as or and hold them in place by ionic bonding. These harmful positive
ions can be removed by ion exchange (the swapping of one ion by another). The process works like a


battery in reverse.


Power supply
ion-exchange


membrane
  


 


H* ions formed ions formed


Figure 20.2: Exchanging ions in the soil by an electrochemical method.


 
e Electrical energy from a power supply is passed through a chemical cell, which is made part of the


soil. In practice, several pairs of electrodes are used.
e The electrodes contain an ion-exchange membrane on the outside of an acid electrolyte, which


circulates throughout the electrode.
e The electrical energy breaks down water to ions at the cell cathode and ions at the cell


anode.
The ions and Ht ions from this reaction pass through the water between the soil particles to


the opposite electrodes.
e Some of the H* ions replace metal cations such as on the surface of the soil particles and
some of the ions replace anions such as CN-. When this happens, the and ions are


released from the surface of the soil particles and go into solution.
e The ions move to the negative electrode and the ions move to positive electrode. These


poisonous ions are then removed in the circulating electrolyte.
Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e Suggest an advantage and disadvantage of this electrochemical process.
e Work with another learner to do some research using books or the internet to find out why cyanide
ions are so poisonous and why nitrate ions, although present in fertilisers, are not good for the


environment.
Suggest why so many ‘brown field sites’ still exist in the world. Someone stated that ‘the number
of these polluted brown field sites is almost certain to increase in great number’. Suggest why this

is not necessarily true.



20.1 Redox reactions revisited
In Chapter 7, you learned to construct equations for redox reactions from relevant half-equations. You also
used the concept of oxidation numbers to show whether a particular reactant has been oxidised or reduced


during a chemical reaction.

Electrons may be gained or lost in redox reactions.

The species (atom, ion or molecule) losing electrons is being oxidised. It acts a reducing agent.


The species gaining electrons is being reduced. It acts an oxidising agent.
Make sure that you can do Questions 1 and 2 before continuing with this chapter. Refer back to Chapter 7 if


you need some help.
Questions
each of the chemical reactions a to c:
i Which species gains electrons?
ii species loses electrons?
Which species is the oxidising agent?
Which species is the reducing agent?
+ Fe > FeCl, + Cu
> +
+ >
2 full redox equations from the following pairs of half-equations.
a_ The reaction of iodide ions with hydrogen peroxide:
r=
H202 + + 2e7 >
The reaction of chloride ions with acidified manganese(IV) oxide:

MnO, + + +
reaction of acidified ions with ions:


> +


+ 8H* + +


20.2 Electrolysis


Electrolytic cells
Electrolysis is the decomposition of a compound into its elements by an electric current. It is often used
to extract metals that are high in the reactivity series. These metals cannot be extracted by heating their
ores with carbon. Electrolysis is also used to produce non-metals such as chlorine and to purify some


metals. Electrolysis is generally carried out in an electrolysis cell (Figure 20.3).


       
direct current


power supply
positive negative
electrode electrode
(anode) (cathode)

electrodes



electrolyte
Figure 20.3: The main parts of an electrolysis cell. The actual structure of the cell will vary according to the element


extracted. The e~ shows the direction of travel of the electrons around the external circuit.


 


In the electrolysis cell:
e the electrolyte is the compound that is decomposed. It is either a molten ionic compound or a


concentrated aqueous solution of ions
the electrodes are rods, made from either carbon (graphite) or metal, which conduct electricity to and


from the electrolyte
e the anode is the positive electrode


e the cathode is the negative electrode


the power supply must be direct current.


Question


3 Why does an ionic compound have to be molten to undergo electrolysis?
Give two properties of graphite that make it a suitable material for use as an electrode. Explain


your answers.


Redox reactions in electrolysis


IMPORTANT
During electrolysis, reduction occurs at the cathode because ions gain electrons from the cathode, and


oxidation occurs at the anode because ions lose electrons to the anode.


 
During electrolysis, the positive ions (cations) move to the cathode. When they reach the cathode they


gain electrons from the cathode. For example:

+ > Cu
+ +


Gain of electrons is reduction. Reduction always occurs at the cathode.
If metal atoms are formed, they may be deposited as a layer of metal on the cathode. Alternatively, they


may form a molten layer in the cell. If hydrogen gas is formed, it bubbles off.
The negative ions (anions) move to the anode. When they reach the anode they lose electrons to the


anode. For example:
> + 2e7
> + +


Loss of electrons is oxidation. Oxidation always occurs at the anode.
Electrolysis is a redox reaction. For example, when molten zinc chloride is electrolysed the electrode


reactions are:
cathode: + > Zn (reduction)


anode: + 2e7 (oxidation)


The electron loss at the anode balances the electron gain at the cathode. Overall, the reaction is:


> Zn +


Question
Explain why cations move towards the cathode during electrolysis.
b lead iodide, is electrolysed, the following reactions occur:
+ 2e7 > Pb and > + 2e7
ii of these equations describes the reaction at the cathode? Explain your answer.


State the ox. no. change of each iodide ion in the reaction


20.3 Quantitative electrolysis
The mass of substance deposited during electrolysis


The mass of a substance produced at an electrode during electrolysis is proportional to:


the time over which a constant electric current passes


e the strength of the electric current.


Combining current and time, we get the relationship:
current


(in amperes, A)



Q = I x


charge time


(in coulombs, C) seconds, s)
The mass of a substance produced at (or removed from) an electrode during electrolysis is proportional to


the quantity of electricity (in coulombs) which passes through the electrolyte.
We can express the quantity of electricity in terms of a unit called the faraday (symbol F). One faraday is
the quantity of electric charge carried by 1 mole of electrons or 1 mole of singly charged ions. Its value is
96 500 C (to 3 significant figures). So the relationship between the Faraday and the Avogadro

constant is F = Le where e is the charge on an electron.
During the electrolysis of silver nitrate solution, silver is deposited at the cathode:
Ag*(aq) + > Ag(s)

1 mol 1 mol 1 mol


One faraday of electricity (96 500 C) is required to deposit 1 mole of silver.


During the electrolysis of sulfate solution, copper is deposited at the cathode:
Cu2+(aq) +


1 mol 2 mol 1 mol
The equation shows that you need 2 moles of electrons to produce 1 mole of copper from ions. So it


requires two faradays of electricity (2 x 96 500 C) to deposit 1 mole of copper.
During the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride, chlorine is produced at the anode:
Ch(g) +


2 mol 1 mol 2 mol
The equation shows that 2 moles of electrons are released when 1 mole of chlorine gas is formed from 2


moles of ions. So it requires two faradays of electricity (2 x 96 500 C) to produce 1 mole of Cl.
During the electrolysis of an aqueous solution of sulfuric acid or aqueous sodium sulfate, oxygen is


produced at the anode:


> O2(g) + +
The equation shows that 4 moles of electrons are released when 1 mole of oxygen gas is formed from 4

moles of ions. So it requires 4 faradays of electricity (4 x 96 500 C) to produce 1 mole of
Calculating amount of substance produced during electrolysis


We can use the value of F to calculate:
the mass of substance deposited at an electrode


e the volume of gas produced at an electrode.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
the mass of lead deposited at the cathode during electrolysis when a current of


flows through molten bromide for 20.0 min.
(A, value: [Pb] = 207; F = 96 500 C


Solution
Step the half-equation for the reaction.


Pb?* + > Pb
Step 2: Find the number of coulombs required to deposit 1 mole of product at the electrode.
2 moles of electrons are required per mole of Pb formed:
= 2F
x 96500


= 193 000 C mol"!
Step 3: Calculate the charge transferred during the electrolysis.

x 20 x 60



Step 4: Calculate the mass by simple proportion using the relative atomic mass.
193 000 C deposits 1 mole Pb, which is 207 g Pb
1800
so 1800 C deposits 207


= 1.93 g Pb


 
the volume of oxygen produced at r.t.p. when a concentrated aqueous solution of sulfuric


acid, is electrolysed for 30.0 min using a current of 0.50 A.
(F = 96 500 C 1 mole of gas occupies 24.0 dm? at


Solution
Step the half-equation for the reaction.


+ +
Step 2: Find the number of coulombs required to produce 1 mole of gas.
4 moles of electrons are released per mole of formed:
= 4F
96500


= 386 000 C
Step 3: Calculate the charge transferred during the electrolysis.

x 30 x 60


= 900C
Step 4: Calculate the volume by simple proportion using the relationship 1 mole of gas occupies


24.0 dm? at r.t.p.


386 000 C produces 1 mole which is 24 dm?
900


so 900 C produces


= 0.0560 dm? at


 


Questions
5 Calculate the mass of silver deposited at the cathode during electrolysis when a current of 1.80 A


flows through an aqueous solution of silver nitrate for 45.0 min.


(A, value: [Ag] = 108; F = 96 500 C
6 Calculate the volume of hydrogen produced at r.t.p. when a concentrated aqueous solution of sulfuric


acid is electrolysed for 15.0 min using a current of 1.40 A.


(F = 96 500 C 1 mole of gas occupies 24.0 dm? at


 
7 the volume of oxygen produced at r.t.p. when a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium


sulfate is electrolysed for 55.0 min using a current of 0.70 A.


(F = 96 500 C 1 mole of gas occupies 24.0 dm? at
Calculating the Avogadro constant by an electrolytic method


The Avogadro constant, L, is the number of specified particles in 1 mole (see Section 3.4).
We can use an electrolytic method to find a value for the Avogadro constant by calculating the charge


associated with 1 mole of electrons.
charge on 1 mole of electrons



charge on 1 electron
We can calculate the charge on the electron by experiment. The results show us that the charge on the


electron is approximately 1.60 x


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 20.1


 


Finding the charge on 1 mole of electrons
The charge on 1 mole of electrons can be found from a simple electrolytic experiment. The apparatus


for this is shown in Figure 20.4.
d.c. power supply


ammeter
 


   
variable


resistor


  
copper

cathode
aqueous
sulfate



Figure 20.4: Apparatus for calculating the mass of copper deposited during the electrolysis of aqueous


sulfate.


 


Procedure


e weigh the pure copper anode and pure copper cathode separately
arrange the apparatus as shown in Figure 20.4; the variable resistor is used to keep the current

constant (about 0.2 amps)

pass a constant electric current for a measured time interval (e.g. 40 minutes exactly)
e remove the cathode and anode and wash and dry them with distilled water and then with propanone


e the cathode and anode.


The cathode increases in mass because copper is deposited. The anode decreases in mass because
the copper goes into solution as copper ions. The decrease in mass of the anode is measured. This is


preferred because the copper does not always ‘stick’ to the cathode very well.
A sample calculation is shown below, using a current of 0.20 A for 34 min.
e mass of anode at start of the experiment = 56.53 g


e mass of anode at end of experiment


mass of copper removed from anode =0.13g
quantity of charge xt
x 34 x 60


= 408C
To deposit 0.13 g of copper requires 408 C, so to deposit 1 mole of copper (63.5 g) requires x 408



But the equation for the electrolysis shows that 2 moles of electrons are needed to produce 1 mole of


copper:
Cu2+ + > Cu
The charge on 1 mole of electrons = x 408 x 4


= 99 646C
If the charge on one electron is 1.60 x L = x (to 2 significant


figures)


This is in good agreement with the accurate value of 6.02 x 1023


 


Questions
8 A learner passed a constant electric current of 0.15 A through a solution of silver nitrate, using pure
silver electrodes, for 45 min exactly. The mass of the anode decreased by 0.45 g. Use this data to


calculate the charge on a mole of electrons.
(A, value: [Ag] = 108)


9 accurate value of the Faraday constant is 96 485 C An accurate value for the charge on one
electron is 1.6022 x C. Use these values to calculate a value of the Avogadro constant to 5


significant figures.


20.4 Electrode potentials

Introducing electrode potentials
A redox equilibrium exists between two chemically related species that are in different oxidation states. For
example, when a copper rod is placed in contact with an aqueous solution of its ions the following

equilibrium exists:
+ = Cu(s)
There are two opposing reactions in this equilibrium.

Metal atoms from the rod entering the solution as metal ions. This leaves electrons behind on the


surface of the rod. For example:


Cu(s) +
in solution accepting electrons from the metal rod and being deposited as metal atoms on the


surface of the rod. For example:
Cu2+(aq) + > Cu(s)


The redox equilibrium is established when the rate of electron gain equals the rate of electron loss.
For unreactive metals such as copper, if this equilibrium is compared with the equilibrium set up by other

metals, the equilibrium set up by copper lies further over to the right.
+ = Cu(s)
ions are therefore relatively easy to reduce. They gain electrons readily to form copper metal.


For reactive metals such as vanadium, the equilibrium lies further over to the left.


+ = V(s)
V?+(aq) ions are therefore relatively difficult to reduce. They gain electrons much less readily by


comparison.


The position of equilibrium differs for different combinations of metals placed in solutions of their ions.
When we place a metal into a solution of its ions, we establish an electric potential (voltage) between the
metal and the metal ions in solution. We cannot measure this potential directly. But we can measure the
difference in potential between the metal / metal ion system and another system. We call this value the
electrode potential, Electrode potential is measured in volts. The system we use for comparison is the

standard hydrogen electrode.
Scientists think the absolute electrical potentials that we cannot measure are caused by the formation of
an electrical double layer when an element is placed in a solution of its ions. For example, when zinc is
placed in a solution containing zinc ions, a tiny number of zinc atoms on the surface of the metal are
converted to zinc ions, which go into solution. This leaves an excess of electrons on the surface of the zinc.
The solution around the metal now has excess ions. Some of these cations near the surface of the
zinc are attracted to its surface. So an electrical double layer is formed. This build-up of charge causes an
electric potential (voltage) between the metal and the metal ions in solution (Figure 20.5).


ions
zinc rod


 




Figure 20.5: The separation of charge when a zinc rod is placed in a solution of Zn2* ions results in an electrical double


layer.


 


The standard hydrogen electrode
The standard hydrogen electrode is one of several types of half-cell that can be used as reference


electrodes. Figure 20.6 shows a standard hydrogen electrode.


platinum wire


    
<—— supply of hydrogen


gas at a pressure of
glass ‘bell’ with


1 atmosphere
a hole in for
hydrogen to


bubble out


platinum electrode


H*, 1.00 mol


Figure 20.6: The standard hydrogen electrode.


 


This electrode consists of:


hydrogen gas at 101 kPa pressure, in equilibrium with H* ions of concentration 1.00 mol


aplatinum electrode covered with platinum black in contact with the hydrogen gas and the H* ions.
The platinum black is finely divided platinum. This allows close contact of hydrogen gas and ions in
solution so that equilibrium between gas and ions is established quickly. The platinum electrode is


inert so it does not take part in the reaction.
We measure standard electrode potential values for all half-cells relative to this electrode. When
connected to another half-cell, the value read on the voltmeter gives the standard electrode potential for


that half-cell.
The half-equation for the hydrogen electrode can be written:
2H*(aq) + =


or


=
The way that you balance the half-equation makes no difference to the value of The equation does not


affect the tendency for the element to gain electrons.
Electrode potential and redox reactions
Electrode potential values give us an indication of how easy it is to reduce a substance.


Note that:
By convention, the electrode potential refers to the reduction reaction. So the electrons appear on the


left-hand side of the half-equation. For example:
+ 3e7 = Al(s)


The more positive (or less negative) the electrode potential, the easier it is to reduce the ions on the
left. So the metal on the right is relatively unreactive and is a relatively poor reducing agent. For


example:


Ag*(aq) + = Ag(s) voltage = +0.80 V
The more negative (or less positive) the electrode potential, the more difficult it is to reduce the ions
on the left. So the metal on the right is relatively reactive and is a relatively good reducing agent. For


example:


+ = Zn(s) voltage =
Question
10 Refer to the list of electrode potentials below to answer parts a to d.
Agt(aq) =Ag(s) = +0.80 V
Co?*(aq) + = Co(s) = —0.28 V
Cu2+(aq) + = Cu(s) =
+ = Pb(s) voltage = —0.13 V
+ = Zn(s) = —0.76 V
metal in the list is the best reducing agent?
b metal ion in the list is most difficult to reduce?

metal in the list is most reactive?
metal ion in the list is the easiest to reduce?


20.5 Combining half-cells


 


Figure 20.7: The / Cu half-cell.

 


In order to measure the electrode potential relating to the half-equation
Cu2+(aq) + > Cu(s)
we place a pure copper rod in a solution of ions (for example sulfate solution). This


/ Cu system is called a half-cell (Figure 20.7).

We use the following standard conditions to make the half-cell:

the ions have a concentration of 1.00 mol

the temperature is 25 °C (298 K)


the rod must be pure copper.


If we connect two half-cells together, we have made an electrochemical cell. We can measure the voltage
between these two half-cells. Figure 20.8 shows a / Cu half-cell connected to a / Zn half-cell to


make a complete electrochemical cell.


Half-cells are connected together using:
wires connecting the metal rods in each half-cell to a high-resistance voltmeter. The electrons flow
round this external circuit from the metal with the more negative (or less positive) electrode potential


to the metal with the less negative (or more positive) electrode potential
asalt bridge to complete the electrical circuit allowing the movement of ions between the two half-


cells so that ionic balance is maintained. A salt bridge does not allow the movement of electrons.
A Salt bridge can be made from a strip of filter paper (or other inert porous material) soaked in a saturated


solution of potassium nitrate.
high-resistance


voltmeter
   


   


copper zinc rod


rod


salt bridge


 
298K


1.00 mol Zn**, 1.00
Figure 20.8: One type of electrochemical cell is made by connecting a Cu2* / Cu half-cell to a / Zn half-cell. The


voltage generated by this cell is +1.10 V.


 
The voltages for the half-cells in Figure 20.8 can be represented by the following half-equations:
Cu2+(aq) + = Cu(s) voltage =


Zn2+(aq) + = Zn(s) voltage = —0.76 V


The relative values of these voltages tell us that ions are more difficult to reduce than ions. So
Cu?* ions will accept electrons from the Zn2* / Zn half-cell and zinc will lose electrons to the Cu2* / Cu half-


cell.
Half-equations can be used to show us the contents of half-cells. A half-cell does not have to be a metal /

metal ion system. We can construct half-cells for any half-equation written. For example:

+ =


+ =
+ 8H*(aq) + +
Note that the oxidised species (having the higher oxidation number) is always written on the left-hand side


and the reduced form on the right-hand side.


Question
11 a why aqueous silver nitrate is not used in a salt bridge when connecting a half-cell


containing Zn and 1.00 mol ZnCl,(aq) to another half-cell.
half-equations for the reactions taking place in the half-cells below. Write each equation as a


reduction (electrons on the left-hand side of the equation).




(make sure that you balance the equation)


+ + H* (make sure that you balance the equation)

Standard electrode potential
The position of equilibrium of a reaction may be affected by changes in the concentration of reagents,
temperature and pressure of gases. The voltage of an electrochemical cell will also depend on these
factors, so we should use standard conditions when comparing electrode potentials. These are:




concentration of ions at 1.00 mol

atemperature of 25 °C (298 K)


any gases should be at a pressure of 1 atmosphere (101 kPa)
the value of the electrode potential of the half-cell is measured relative to the standard hydrogen


electrode.
Under these conditions, the electrode potential we measure is called the standard electrode potential.
This has the symbol, E®. It is spoken of as ‘E standard’. These are sometimes referred to as standard


reduction potentials because they refer to the reduction reaction (addition of electrons).
The standard electrode potential for a half-cell is the voltage measured under standard conditions with a


standard hydrogen electrode as the other half-cell.

Measuring standard electrode potentials
There are three main types of half-cell whose value can be obtained when connected to a standard

hydrogen electrode:


metal / metal ion half-cell


non-metal / non-metal ion half-cell


half-cell.


Half-cells containing metals and metal ions
Figure 20.9 shows how to measure the E® value for a / Cu half-cell. The Cu2* / Cu half-cell is
connected to a standard hydrogen electrode and the voltage measured. The voltage is +0.34 V. The copper
is the positive terminal (positive pole) of the cell and the hydrogen electrode is the negative terminal. The


two half-equations are:
+ 2e7 = Cu(s) Fo =


H*(aq) + = =
      


 


voltmeter


copper 1 atmosphere


rod


salt bridge


 


| platinum


Cu?*, H*, dm-?


Figure 20.9: Measuring the standard electrode potential of a / Cu half-cell.


 
The values show us that Cu2* ions are easier to reduce than Ht ions (they have a more positive ES


value).
Cu?* ions are more likely to gain electrons than H* ions.
* So Cu?* ions will accept electrons from the H* / half-cell and will lose electrons to the Cu2* / Cu


half-cell.


Figure 20.10 shows how to measure the E® value for a Zn2* / Zn half-cell. The voltage of the / Zn half-
cell is —0.76 V. The zinc is the negative terminal (negative pole) of the cell and the hydrogen electrode is


the positive terminal. The two half-equations are:
H*(aq) + = =


Zn2+(aq) + = Zn(s) = -0.76V
The values show us that Zn2* ions are more difficult to reduce than ions (they have a more
negative E® value).


ions are less likely to gain electrons than ions.
lose electrons to the H* / half-cell and H* ions will gain electrons from the / Zn half-


cell.

   



<—
1 atmosphere


platinum


1.00 mol H*, 1.00 mol


Figure 20.10: Measuring the standard electrode potential of a Zn2* / Zn half-cell.

 

From these two examples, we can see that:
Reduction takes place at the positive terminal of the cell. For example, in the / Zn; H* / cell:


=


Oxidation takes place at the negative terminal of the cell. For example, in the / Zn: H* / cell:


Zn(s) + 2e7

Question
12 Write half-equations for the three reactions taking place in the half-cells shown on the left in
Figure 20.11.


Fe2+/Fe half-cell
  
 


  
iron rod


salt bridge
i


standard
298K hydrogen


electrode


half-cell


chromium ——


rod salt bridge


  
standard
hydrogen


Cr2+ electrode


Ag*/Ag half-cell


silver rod


 
standard
hydrogen


electrode


 


Figure 20.11: Measuring standard electrode potentials.


 


b are the standard electrode potentials for these half-cell reactions?


c all the necessary conditions in each cell.


Half-cells containing non-metals and non-metal ions
In half-cells that do not contain a metal, electrical contact with the solution is made by using platinum wire
or platinum foil as an electrode. The redox equilibrium is established at the surface of the platinum. The


platinum electrode is inert and so plays no part in the reaction.

The platinum must be in contact with both the element and the aqueous solution of its ions.
Figure 20.12 shows a Cl, / half-cell connected to a standard hydrogen electrode. The voltage of the Cl, /
half-cell is +1.36 V. So the Clz / half-cell forms the positive terminal of the cell and the hydrogen

electrode is the negative terminal. The two half-equations are:


+ = +1.36V


H*(aq) + = =
The E® values show us that molecules are easier to reduce than H* ions (they have a more positive
E® value).


molecules are more likely to gain electrons than H* ions.
molecules will gain electrons from the H* / half-cell and molecules will lose electrons to


the /
    
         
 
     
     
  


 


voltmeter
<—



1 atmosphere



1 atmosphere


salt bridge


platinum


 


Figure 20.12: Measuring the standard electrode potential of a / half-cell.


 
Questions


13 Look at Figure 20.13. Write a half-equation for the half-cell on the left-hand side.


b is the value for this half-cell?


  


voltmeter


Hyg),


1 atmosphere


platinum salt bridge


platinum


sulfur (solid) 1.00 mol 1.00 mol dm-3


Figure 20.13: Measuring the standard electrode potential of an S / S2~ half-cell.


 
14 Draw a diagram to show how you would measure the standard electrode potential for the half-cell:


+ =


Include the actual value of +0.54 V on your diagram.

Half-cells containing ions of the same element in different oxidation states
Half-cells can contain two ions of different oxidation states derived from the same element. For example, a
mixture of Fe3+ and ions can form a half-cell using a platinum electrode. In this type of half-cell, the
concentration of each ion present is 1.00 mol Figure 20.14 shows the set-up for a cell used to
measure the standard electrode potential of the / half-cell.



      


 


1 atmosphere


platinum salt bridge


platinum
1.00 mol dm-3 Ht, 1.00 mol


Fe2+, 1.00 mol dm-3


Figure 20.14: Measuring the standard electrode potential of the / half-cell.

 
The voltage of this half-cell is +0.77 V.


+ =
Some reactions involve several ionic species. For example:


+ 8H*(aq) + 5e7 +
The H* ions are included because they are essential for the conversion of MnO,~ ions) to


Mn?* ions.
So the half-cell contains:
mol ions


mol Mn?*(aq) ions


1.00 mol H*(aq) ions.
Figure 20.15 shows the set-up of a cell used to measure the standard electrode potential of the /


half-cell.
 
   
  
    


   


voltmeter



lati 1 atmosphere


Platinum salt bridge


platinum


298K
1.00 mol H*, 1.00 mol
Mn2*, 1.00 mol


1.00 mol


Figure 20.15: Measuring the standard electrode potential of the / half-cell.


 


Questions


What is the E® value for the half-cell on the left-hand side of Figure 20.15?
16 Why is platinum used in preference to other metals in half-cells where the reaction does not involve a


metallic element?
Show, with the aid of a diagram, how you would measure the E® value for the half-cell shown by the

equation:
+ 2H* +


20.6 Using values


Using values to predict cell voltages
We can use E® values to calculate the voltage of an electrochemical cell made up of two half-cells, even
when neither of them is a standard hydrogen electrode. The voltage measured is the difference between

the E® values of the two half-cells. We call this value the standard cel! potential.
For the electrochemical cell shown in Figure 20.16, the two relevant half-equations are:
Ag*(aq) + = Ag(s) =


Zn?*(aq) + = Zn(s) = -0.76V


The voltage of this cell is +0.80 — (—0.76) = +1.56 V (Figure 20.17).
Note that in order to calculate the cell voltage, we always subtract the less positive value from the more


positive value.



voltmeter


silver zinc rod


rod


 


 


salt bridge


 



|


298K


Ag*, 1.00


 


Figure 20.16: An / Ag, Zn2* / Zn electrochemical cell.


 

+1.00
+0.80 =
+0.60
+0.40
+0.20
0.00 1.56V
-0.20



-1.00


Figure 20.17: The difference between +0.80 V and —0.76 V is +1.56 V.


 
The E® value for the Ag* / Ag half-cell is more positive than for the / Zn half-cell. So the Ag* / Ag half-


cell is the positive pole and the / Zn half-cell is the negative pole of the cell.


For the electrochemical cell shown in Figure 20.18, the relevant half-equations are:
Fe3+(aq) + e~ = = +0.77V


Cu2+(aq) + = Cu(s) = +0.34V


The voltage of this cell is +0.77 — (+0.34) = +0.43 V.
The E® value for the / Fe2* half-cell is more positive than for the Cu2* / Cu half-cell. So the /


half-cell is the positive pole and the / Cu half-cell is the negative pole of the cell.
 


 


voltmeter


  
copper
rod


salt bridge


  


platinum
298 K
1.00


Fe?*,


Figure 20.18: A Cut / Cu, / electrochemical cell.


 


REFLECTION
Write down two half-reactions and their standard electrode potentials from Appendix 2 of this


coursebook. Start by choosing simple examples. Share this example with another learner. Both of you
will now draw and label a diagram of the electrochemical cell that can be made by coupling these half-
reactions. Compare your diagram with the other learner and find a similar diagram in the coursebook


to check if you were correct.


What could you do to try and improve your drawing / labelling?


 


Questions
18 diagram of an electrochemical cell consisting of a / Cr half-cell and a /


cell.
the data in Appendix 2 to calculate the cell voltage.


half-cell is the positive pole?
19 Drawa diagram of an electrochemical cell consisting of a Mn2* / Mn half-cell and a Pb2+ / Pb half-


cell.


the data in Appendix 2 to calculate the cell voltage.


half-cell is the positive pole?


E® values and the direction of electron flow
We can deduce the direction of electron flow in the wires in the external circuit by comparing the values
for the two half-cells which make up the electrochemical cell. For example, in Figure 20.16 these voltages


are:
+ e~ = Ag(s) = +0.80 V
+ = Zn(s) =


The relative values of these voltages tell us that ions are more difficult to reduce than Ag* ions. So:

will lose electrons to the / Ag half-cell
ions will accept electrons from the / Zn half-cell.



The electrons move through the wires in the external circuit. They do not travel through the electrolyte


solution.
So the electron flow is from the Zn2* / Zn half-cell to the Ag* / Ag half-cell. In other words, the flow is from
the negative pole to the positive pole. It may help you to remember that the more positive pole attracts


the negative electrons.


IMPORTANT


1 The positive pole of a cell is the half-cell which has the less negative or more positive value.
2 The direction of electron flow through the external circuit is from the half-cell with the more
negative (less positive) value of to the half-cell with the less negative (or more positive) value of


 
In the electrochemical cell in Figure 20.18, the electrons move in the external circuit from the / Cu


half-cell to the Fe3+ / Fe2+ half-cell.
Fe?*(aq) + = =


+ = Cu(s) = +0.34V
The negative pole of this cell is provided by the / Cu half-cell. This because the / Cu half-cell is


better at losing electrons than the / half-cell.


Question
20 State the direction of the electron flow in the electrochemical cells represented by the following pairs


of half-equations. Use the data in Appendix 2 to help you.
+ 2e7 = and + 2e7 = Mn
=


+ 14H* + + and + = Cu


+ = Ni and + 3e7 = Fe


Using values to predict if a reaction will occur
Standard electrode potential values, give us a measure of how easy or difficult it is to oxidise or reduce
a species. We can compare the oxidising and reducing powers of elements and ions by comparing the


values for their half reactions.
Figure 20.19 compares the oxidising and reducing powers of selected elements and ions. The values are
listed in order of increasingly negative values. For each half-equation, the more oxidised form is on the left


and the more reduced form is on the right.
The more positive the value of the greater the tendency for the half-equation to proceed in the


forward direction.
The less positive the value of the greater the tendency for the half-equation to proceed in the


reverse direction.


The more positive the value of the easier it is to reduce the species on the left of the half-equation.


The less positive the value of E®, the easier it is to oxidise the species on the right of the half-equation.


We can make an electrochemical cell from the two half-cells:
Cu?*(aq) + 2e7 Cu(s) = +0.34V


+ = Zn(s) = -0.76V
When these two half-cells are connected together, a reaction takes place in each of the half-cells. The
values can be used to predict whether the reaction happening in each half-cell is a reduction (i.e. forward
direction) reaction, or an oxidation (i.e. backwards direction) reaction. If the reactions happening in each
half-cell are combined, we can produce an ionic equation for the reaction that takes place in the


electrochemical cell as a whole.
Cu2* has a greater tendency to gain electrons than so the chemical reaction that proceeds in this


half-cell is in the forward direction:


Cu2+(aq) + > Cu(s)
Zn has a greater tendency to lose electrons than Cu. This means the chemical reaction that proceeds in


this half-cell is in the reverse direction:


Zn(s) + 2e7
We can combine these two half-equations to show the direction of the reaction in the electrochemical cell


as a whole.


Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) > + Cu(s)
This is the reaction taking place in the electrochemical cell. But it is also the reaction that takes place if a
piece of zinc metal is placed directly into a 1.00 mol solution of Cu2* ions. A reaction is said to be


feasible if it is likely to occur. The reaction between zinc metal and copper ions is feasible.
strongest weakest
oxidising agent reducing agent


A


+ (aq) = +1.36V


Ag*(aq) == Ag(s) E° = +0.80V
increasing reducing
power of element on the
| (increasing tendency

to lose electrons)


increasing oxidising
power of ions/molecules
on the left (increasing H*(aq) + (g)


tendency to gain electrons)


Cu?*(aq) + E°=+0.34V
Zn**(aq) + 2e° == =-0.76V


+


 


 

weakest strongest


oxidising agent reducing agent


Figure 20.19: Standard electrode potentials for some oxidising and reducing agents.


 
If the forward reaction is feasible, the reverse reaction (between Cu metal and zinc ions) is not feasible. If a

piece of copper metal is placed directly into a 1.00 mol solution of ions, no reaction takes place.
We can predict whether a reaction is likely to occur by referring to a list of half-reactions with their ES
values listed in descending order from most positive to most negative (see Figure 20.20). When we select
two half-equations, the direction of the reaction is given by a clockwise pattern (reactant, product,
reactant, product) starting from the top left as shown in Figure 20.21 for the cell made from the two half-
cells Cu2+ / Cu and / Zn.


 


Figure 20.20: As predicted by the values, zinc reacts with ions but copper does not react with ions.


 



Cu
better (product)
oxidant


(reactant)
| = Zn

product better

reductant


(reactant)
Figure 20.21: A reaction occurs in a direction so that the stronger oxidising agent reacts with the stronger reducing


agent.


 
The following Worked examples shows how we can use E® values to predict whether a reaction occurs or


not.


IMPORTANT
1 When two half-cells are joined, the half-cell with the more positive value of accepts electrons


more readily and the reaction proceeds in the forward direction.
2 reaction occurs in the direction where the better oxidising agent reacts with the better


reducing agent.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
Will chlorine oxidise ions to ions?


Solution
Write down the two half-equations with the more positive value first.


+ =
> = +0.77 V


Identify the stronger oxidising agent and the stronger reducing agent.
Cl, is the better oxidising agent. This is because the more positive value of indicates that


molecules are more likely to accept electrons than are ions.
is the better reducing agent. This is because the more negative value of indicates that


ions are more likely to release electrons than are ions.
The stronger oxidising agent reacts with the stronger reducing agent, meaning that the reaction


is feasible.
The top reaction goes in the forward direction and the bottom reaction goes in the reverse


direction:
+ =
Fe2+(aq) = + e7
Combine the two half-equations:


+ > +
This reaction is feasible. The prediction made using E® values is correct, this reaction takes place in
a suitable electrochemical cell, or when Cl, gas is bubbled into a 1.00 mol solution of


ions.
This means that this reaction:


+ Fe3*(aq) + Fe?*(aq)
is not feasible. If a 1.00 mol solution of ions is added to a 1.00 mol solution of


ions, no reaction takes place. This prediction has been made using E® values, and it is correct.
E® values are a very powerful tool for predicting which redox reactions are feasible, and which ones


are not feasible.


 
    


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
    
  
  
 
 
 
 


  
4 Will iodine, oxidise ions to Fe3* ions?
Solution
Give the two half-equations, with most positive value first.
+ =

Identify the stronger oxidising agent and the stronger reducing agent.
is the better oxidising agent. It is more likely to accept electrons than I, molecules.


is the better reducing agent. It is more likely to release electrons than Fe?* ions.


weaker oxidising agent and is a relatively weaker reducing agent. So the
reaction is not feasible. (The reaction that is feasible is the reaction between ions and


ions.)
 


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
will hydrogen peroxide, reduce acidified ions, to ions?


Solution


Write down the two half-equations with the more positive value first.
+ 8H*(aq) +

= +
+ 2H*(aq) + 2e7



= H,0,(aq) =


Identify the stronger oxidising agent and the stronger reducing agent.
The system + is the better oxidising agent. It is more likely to accept electrons than


the system O + 2H*.


 
Figure 20.22: If the is acidified, would it be safe to do this in an open lab or would chlorine gas be


produced? You will answer this question in Question 21, part a.


 
is the better reducing agent. It is more likely to release electrons than Mn?* ions.


The stronger oxidising agent reacts with the stronger reducing agent, so the reaction is feasible.
The top reaction goes in the forward direction and the bottom reaction goes in the reverse


direction:
+ 8H*(aq) + 5e7


= Mn?*(aq) +
= + 2H*(aq) + 2e7


Balance the electrons, so that ten electrons are involved in each half-equation:
+ 16H*(aq) + 10e7


= 2Mn?*(aq) +
5H202(aq) = + +


Combine the two half-equations:
+ 6H*(aq) +


= 2Mn?*(aq) + + 502(g)


Note that 10 H* ions have been cancelled from each side.


 
We can use the relative voltage of the half-cells to predict whether a reaction takes place without
considering which species is the best oxidant or reductant. The procedure is given in Worked examples 6


and 7.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 


6 Will bromine oxidise silver to silver ions?


Solution
Step 1: Write the equation for the suggested reaction.


+ Ag > + Ag*
Step 2: Write the two half-equations:


Ag =Agt +e7
Step the value of for each half-reaction but reverse the sign of the half-equation
showing oxidation (loss of electrons). This is because the data book values are always for


the reduction reaction.
+ =
+e7 = -0.80 V


Step 4: Add the two voltages. This is because we are combining the two half-equations.
= +1.07 +



Step the value of the sum of the two voltages is positive the reaction will occur as written. If


the value of the sum of the two voltages is negative the reaction will not occur.
In this case the sum of the two voltages is positive so bromine will oxidise silver to silver ions.
Will iodine oxidise silver to silver ions?
Solution
Step 1: Write the equation for the suggested reaction.
+ Ag + Agt
Step two half-equations are:


Step the values, with the sign reversed for the oxidation reaction.

Ag = Ag* = -0.80 V


Step 4: Add the two voltages.
= +0.54 +


Step 5: Thesum of the two voltages is negative, so iodine will not oxidise silver to silver ions.


 


Questions

the data in Appendix 2 to predict whether or not the following reactions are feasible. If a reaction


does occur, write a balanced equation for it.
ions oxidise ions to Cl, in acidic conditions?
b Can ions oxidise ions to in acidic conditions?


ions oxidise ions to V3* ions?


H* ions oxidise ions to Fe3+ ions?


22 Suggest a suitable reagent that can carry out each of the following oxidations or reductions. Use the
data in Appendix 2 to help you.
The reduction of Zn?* ions to Zn.

oxidation of Br~ ions to
reduction of acidified ions to


oxidation of ions to Cl,
the cell voltage method described in Worked examples 6 and 7 above to answer Question 21,


parts atod.


values and oxidising and reducing agents


IMPORTANT
Remember that oxidising agents accept electrons from another species and reducing agents donate


electrons to another species.


 
Look back at Figure 20.19. Note the following as the values of for each of these reduction reactions gets


more negative.
The species on the left of the equation become weaker oxidising agents. They accept electrons less


readily.
The species on the right of the equation become stronger reducing agents. They release electrons


more readily.
Cu will not reduce ions to Zn. So how can we reduce ions? The answer is to react the Zn2* ions
with a stronger reducing agent, which should have an E® value more negative than the E® value for /
Zn. In Figure 20.19, we see that the half-equation / Mg has a more negative E® value. So Mg is a

suitable reducing agent.


Zn?*(aq) + = Zn(s) = -0.76V
Mg?*(aq) + = Mg(s) = -2.38V
Zn?* is the better oxidising agent. It is more likely to accept electrons than Mg?* ions. Mg is the better


reducing agent. It is more likely to release electrons than Zn.
Nitric acid is a good oxidising agent, but it will not oxidise chloride ions to chlorine. So how can we oxidise
ions? The answer is to react the ions with a stronger oxidising agent, which should have an


value more positive than the value for / The half-equation
+ + +


provides a suitable oxidising agent.
This half-equation has a more positive E© value than that for the / half-equation. So acidified


ions are a suitable oxidising agent to oxidise chloride ions to chlorine (see Figure 20.22).
+ + Mn?*(aq) +


+ =
Acidified is the better oxidising agent. It is more likely to accept electrons than molecules. is


the better reducing agent. It is more likely to release electrons than
We can explain the relative oxidising abilities of the halogens in a similar way. The standard electrode


potentials for the halogens are:
= +2.87V

+


= +0.54V


Based on these E® values, as we go down Group 17 from to Ip, the oxidising ability of the halogen


decreases and the ability of halide ions to act as reducing agents increases (Figure 20.23).


 
Figure 20.23: Aqueous chlorine displaces bromine from a solution of potassium bromide. We can use E® values to explain


why a halogen higher in Group 17 displaces a halogen lower in the group from a solution of its halide ions.


 

Questions
24 Use the values for the halogens to explain the following:
why bromine can oxidise an aqueous solution of iodide ions


bromine does not react with chloride ions.


Use the data in Appendix 2 to answer these questions.
the ions Ag*, and which one needs the strongest reducing agent to reduce it to


metal atoms?


b the atoms Ag, Cr and Fe, which one needs the strongest oxidising agent to oxidise it to an ion?


REFLECTION
Write down two half-reactions and their standard electrode potentials from Appendix 2 of this
coursebook. Start by choosing simple examples. Ask another learner to deduce the electrode
potential of the cell and then work together to construct a balanced equation for the reaction.
Then reverse the roles: you choose the half-reactions and the other learner deduces the electrode


potential. Carry on like this until you are both sure that you understand the processes involved.
What processes did you go through to calculate the cell potential and balance the equations? What


did you learn about yourself as worked through this?

 
How does the value of vary with ion concentration?



In Chapter 8 we saw that the position of an equilibrium reaction is affected by changes in concentration,
temperature and pressure. Redox equilibria are no different. When we compare the voltage of a standard
half-cell, X, with a standard hydrogen electrode, we are measuring E® for the half-cell X. If we change the
concentration or temperature of half-cell X, the electrode potential also changes. Under these non-standard


conditions we use the symbol E for the electrode potential.
What happens to the electrode potential when we change the concentration of ions in a half-cell? Let us


take an example of a metal / metal ion equilibrium:


Zn2+(aq) + = Zn(s) = -0.76V
e If is greater than 1.00 mol the value of E becomes less negative / more positive (for


example —0.61 V).
If is less than 1.00 mol the value of E becomes more negative / less positive (for


example, —0.80 V).
We can apply Le Chatelier’s principle to redox equilibria. If we increase the concentration of the species on
the left of the equation, the position of equilibrium will shift to the right. So the value of E becomes more


positive / less negative.
If two different ions are present in the half-cell, we have to consider both ions.
Let us take the equilibrium between ions and ions as an example.
Fett =


1.00 mol
e is greater than 1.00 mol dm ~3 (keeping [Fe2*] = 1.00 mol the value of E becomes


more positive (for example +0.85 V).
e If is less than 1.00 mol (keeping = 1.00 mol the value of E becomes less


positive (for example +0.70 V).
is greater than 1.00 mol (keeping = 1.00 mol the value of E becomes less


positive (for example +0.70 V).
If is less than 1.00 mol (keeping = 1.00 mol the value of E becomes more


positive (for example +0.85 V).
You can see from the information above that if we increase the concentration of both the Fe?* and


ions, these effects may cancel each other out.
How can we predict whether or not a given reaction will occur under non-standard conditions? The answer
is that if the values of the two half-reactions involved differ by more than 0.30 V, then the reaction
predicted by values is highly likely to occur. So chlorine is likely to oxidise Fe2+ ions even if the conditions
are not standard. This is because the difference in their values is 0.59 V, which is considerably greater


than 0.30 V.
+ =


Fe3+(aq) + = =
We cannot, however, predict with confidence whether the reaction between ions and will take


place if the conditions are too far from standard.
+ 8H*(aq) + +



+ =


This is because the difference in values is 0.16 V, which is considerably smaller than 0.30 V.
The figure of 0.30 V given here to help us to tell if a reaction will still occur under non-standard conditions
is a rough guide only. If E values differ by less than 0.30 V, non-standard conditions may result in an


unexpected outcome.


Question
26 The half-cell + 14H* + = + has an E® value of +1.33 V.
how the value of changes if the other species are kept at 1.00 mol but:
is increased
ii is decreased


iii is increased.
b effect would each of these concentration changes have on the strength of the acidified


solution as an oxidising agent?
conditions would you use to make a solution of as strong an oxidising agent as


possible?


Le Chatelier’s principle to explain your answer to part c.


The Nernst equation
If we consider a cell made up from a silver / silver ion electrode and a copper / ion electrode, the


reaction taking place is:


Cu(s) + 2Agt(aq) Cu2*(aq) + 2Ag(s) = +0.46 V
This equation relates to standard conditions for the concentrations of the ions (1.00 mol If we
change the concentration of the silver ions, the cell is no longer standard, so we use the symbol The
graph, Figure 20.24, shows how the value of changes with the concentration of silver ions. Note that


we have plotted the value of against the logarithm of the silver ion concentration.



cell


    


 

  

T T T T 1
-7 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0

Ig


Figure 20.24: Increasing the concentration of silver ions in the cell reaction Cu(s) + 2Ag*(aq) = Cu2+(aq) + 2Ag(s) makes


the value of more positive.


 
The effect of concentration and temperature on the value of can be deduced using the Nernst


equation. For a given electrode, e.g. a Cu(s) / electrode, the relationship is:
E= +
where
E is the electrode potential under non-standard conditions
E® is the standard electrode potential
R is the gas constant, 8.31, in J
T is the kelvin temperature


z is the number of electrons transferred in the reaction

F is the value of the Faraday constant in C
In is the natural logarithm



[oxidised] refers to the concentration of the oxidised form in the half-equation.

Fortunately for us, for a metal / metal ion electrode, we can simplify this equation in three ways:
The natural logarithm, In, is related to log to the base 10 by the relationship

In x = 2.303 x


temperature the values of R, T and F are constant


The equation then becomes
0.059 [oxidised species]


B= [reduced


 


 
So for the reaction Fe?+(aq) + e~ = in which the concentration of is 0.50 mol and


the concentration of is 1.0 mol


IMPORTANT


The form of the Nernst equation that you are expected to know is


 


 
0.059 [oxidised species]


+ 10


 


Fe3+(aq) is the oxidised form, is the reduced form and z = 1.0


Substituting into the Nernst equation we have:
— Fe + 0.059


E= +
Fora metal / metal ion electrode, e.g.
Cu2+(aq) + 2e = Cu(s)


the reduced form is the metal.


[oxidised species]


Note that the concentration of the metal does not change. So the ratio can be written


species]


[oxidised form], e.g.


This means that the relationship becomes:


 


0059 [oxidised form]


Note that if the temperature is not 25 °C the full form of the Nernst equation must be used.


Question
27 Calculate the value of the electrode potential at 298 K of a Ni(s) / electrode that has a


concentration of ions of 1.5 mol = —0.25 V.
b the electrode potential of a silver / silver ion electrode, Ag(s) / Ag*(aq), at 298 K when


the concentration of ions is 0.0002 mol = +0.80 V.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
8 Calculate the value of the electrode potential at 298 K of a Cu(s) / electrode that has a

concentration of Cu2*(aq) ions of 0.001 mol = +0.34 V

Solution
Substituting the values in the relationship:

E = + [Cu?*(aq)]


E = +0.34 + 289 (0.001)


E = +0.34 — 0.089 =


Note how [oxidised form] changes the sign of the second term in the equation:


If the concentration is 1 mol [oxidised form] is 0 and E = E®.
the concentration is less than 1 mol [oxidised form] is negative and E is less


positive than
If the concentration is greater than 1 mol [oxidised form] is positive and is more


positive than E®.


IMPORTANT



If both oxidised and reduced species in solution have the same concentration, the ratio


[reduced species]
1 and since = 0, E = E®. Note that this applies to any concentration, e.g. 0.05 mol


oxidised species and 0.05 mol reduced species.


 


Feasibility predictions based on don’t always work!
The feasibility of a reaction based on E® values is no guarantee that a reaction will proceed quickly. It only
tells us that a reaction is possible, and that the reverse reaction does not occur. Some reactions are
feasible, but they proceed so slowly that they do not seem to be taking place. Take, for example, the lack
of reactivity of zinc with cold water. Remember that water contains Ht ions. The relevant half-equations


are:
H*(aq) + =


+ 2e7 = Zn(s)
Even when the low concentration of Ht ions is taken into account, E® values predict that a reaction should
occur. The rate of reaction between zinc and water, however, is extremely slow. It is the rate of reaction


rather than the value of which is determining the lack of reactivity.


Questions
28 A half-cell containing Sn in 1.00 mol ions is connected to another half-cell containing Zn in


1.00 mol Zn?* ions.
Zn2+(aq) + = Zn(s) = -0.76V


+ = Sn(s)
Which one of the following is the value of E when the concentration of both the Zn2*(aq) ions and Sn2*


(aq) are changed to 0.1 mol
V




D -1V
29 An industrial process relies on a reaction that is impractically slow under normal conditions. How might
you try to solve this problem? Use your knowledge of reaction rates to suggest several different

approaches.
30 Describe two limitations to using values to predict the feasibility of a reaction.


20.7 More about electrolysis


In Section 20.3 we studied the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. During electrolysis:
cations (positive ions) move towards the cathode where they gain electrons; gain of electrons is


reduction
anions (negative ions) move towards the anode where they lose electrons; loss of electrons is


oxidation.
In this section we shall find out how the nature of the electrolyte and the concentration of


electrolytes affects the products of electrolysis.


Electrolysis of molten electrolytes
When pure molten ionic compounds containing two simple ions are electrolysed, a metal is formed at the


cathode and a non-metal at the anode. Some examples are shown in Table 20.1.
aluminium oxide aluminium oxygen


magnesium bromide magnesium bromine


 


sodium chloride sodium chlorine


Table 20.1: The products formed at the cathode and anode when some molten salts are electrolysed.

 

Let us take the electrolysis of molten zinc chloride as an example.
At the cathode, the metal ions gain electrons and are reduced to the metal.


+ > Zn


At the anode, the non-metal ions lose electrons and are oxidised to a non-metal.


> + 2e7


Electrolysis of aqueous solutions
Aqueous solutions of electrolytes contain more than one cation and more than one anion. For example, an
aqueous solution of sodium chloride contains Na*, Cl-, Ht and ions. The H* and ions arise from


the ionisation of water:
= H* +
So, which ions are discharged during the electrolysis of aqueous solutions?


Among other things this depends on:


the relative electrode potential of the ions


the concentration of the ions.


Electrolysis products and electrode potentials
When an aqueous ionic solution is electrolysed using inert electrodes, there is usually only one product
obtained at each electrode. The ease of discharge of cations at the cathode is related to their electrode


potentials. Figure 20.25 shows some half-reactions and their electrode potentials.
The cation that is most easily reduced is discharged at the cathode. So the cation in the half-equation with


the most positive value will be discharged.
When a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium chloride (1.00 mol is electrolysed, ions and
Na* ions are present in the solution. Hydrogen rather than sodium is formed at the cathode because Ht


ions are more easily reduced than Nat ions.
H* =


Nat(aq) + e~ = Na(s)
IMPORTANT


Remember the three things which decide the product at an electrode:


1 Is the electrolyte molten or an aqueous solution?
2 Are the discharge potentials of the competing ions, e.g. OH~ and in the electrochemical series


(discharge series) similar or significantly different?


the concentration of the relevant ions high or low?

 

+0.80 Ag*(aq)
+


H*(aq) +e =
Increasing ease
+ = Pb(s) of discharge of
Zn**(aq) = cation at cathode
-2.38


+e = Nals)


A


Figure 20.25: The ease of discharge of ions at a cathode in electrolysis is related to the electrode potential of the ions.


 
When a concentrated aqueous solution of copper(II) sulfate (1.00 mol is electrolysed, ions and
Cu?* ions are present in the solution. Copper rather than hydrogen is formed at the cathode because Cu2*


ions are more easily reduced than ions.


+ = Cu(s) = +0.34V


H* =


At the anode, using platinum electrodes, the ease of discharge of anions follows the order:


(aq), (aq)


 


increasing ease of discharge, increasing ease of oxidation
When a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium sulfate (1.00 mol is electrolysed, ions
and ions are present in the solution. Hydroxide ions are discharged at the anode because OH™ ions
are more easily oxidised than ions. The OH™ ions are oxidised to oxygen, which bubbles off at the


anode.


> O2(g) + + 4e7
When a concentrated aqueous solution of sodium iodide (1.00 mol is electrolysed, ions and
ions are present in the solution. lodide ions are discharged at the anode because ions are more easily


oxidised than ions.

> +
Note that in the discussion above, we have used standard electrode potentials. If conditions are standard,
the concentration of the aqueous solution is 1.00 mol with respect to the ionic compound dissolved in
water. But the concentration of hydrogen and hydroxide ions in solution is very low. We saw in Section 20.6
that we can use electrode potential values to predict whether or not a reaction will occur under non-
standard conditions. As long as the difference in electrode potentials is greater than 0.30 V, we can be


fairly sure that the predictions will be correct.
Questions
31 An aqueous solution of sodium sulfate, is electrolysed using carbon electrodes.
why hydrogen is formed at the cathode and not sodium.
a half-equation for the reaction occurring at the anode.
32 Predict the electrolysis products at the anode and cathode when the following are electrolysed:
aluminium iodide
aqueous solution of magnesium chloride


aqueous solution of sodium bromide


zinc oxide.


Electrolysis products and solution concentration
When aqueous solutions are electrolysed, the ions are rarely present at concentrations of 1.00 mol
In Section 20.6 we saw that the value of E changes with the concentration of the ion. An ion, Z, higher in
the discharge series may be discharged in preference to one below it if Z is present at a relatively higher
concentration than normal. For this to be possible, the E values of the competing ions are usually less than


0.30 V different from each other.
When a concentrated solution of sodium chloride is electrolysed, chloride ions are discharged at the anode
in preference to hydroxide ions. This is because chloride ions are present in a much higher concentration


than hydroxide ions. The chloride ions fall below the hydroxide ions in the discharge series.


But what happens when we electrolyse an extremely dilute solution of sodium chloride?
We find that oxygen, rather than chlorine, is formed at the anode. This is because the relatively lower
concentration of ions allows ions to fall below ions in the discharge series. In reality, the
electrolysis of a dilute aqueous solution of sodium chloride gives a mixture of chlorine and oxygen at the


anode. The proportion of oxygen increases, the more dilute the solution.


Question
33 Aconcentrated aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid is electrolysed.
Write half-equations to show the reactions at:
i the cathode


ii the anode.
Avery dilute solution of hydrochloric acid is electrolysed. What substance or substances are


formed at the anode? Explain your answer.


REFLECTION
Make a list of the relationships (equations) between the various physical quantities that you have
come across in this chapter, e.g. electric current, electrode potential, etc. Give the unit of each of


these physical quantities.
Compare your list with that of another learner. Which of these relationships (equations) do you


need more help with understanding? How will you get this help?


SUMMARY
During electrolysis, reduction occurs at the cathode (negative electrode) because ions gain electrons from the


cathode and oxidation occurs at the anode (positive electrode) because ions lose electrons to the anode.
A metal is formed at the cathode and a non-metal at the anode when molten metal salts are electrolysed. Hydrogen
may be formed at the cathode and oxygen at the anode when dilute aqueous solutions of metal salts are


electrolysed.
The relationship between the Faraday constant (F), the Avogadro constant (L) and the charge on an electron (E) is


given by F = Le.
The quantity of charge, in coulombs, passed during electrolysis is found by multiplying the current, in amps, by


time, in seconds: Q = It.
A standard hydrogen electrode is a half-cell in which hydrogen gas at a pressure of 101 kPa bubbles through a


solution of 1.00 mol H*(aq) ions.
The standard electrode potential of a half-cell is the voltage of the half-cell under standard conditions


compared with a standard hydrogen electrode.
The direction of electron flow in a simple cell is from the half-cell that has the more negative (or less positive)


electrode potential to the half-cell that has the less negative (or more positive) electrode potential.
A particular redox reaction will occur if the of the half-equation involving the species being reduced is more


positive than the E® of the half-equation of the species being oxidised.
The Nernst equation shows the relationship between the concentration of aqueous ions in each half-cell and the


electrode potential:
[oxidised species]


[reduced species]
= 0.059

+



 


 


 


diagram shows an electrochemical cell designed to find the standard electrode potential for


  
zinc.
A
B

zinc foil
the apparatus labelled A and give a characteristic it should have. [2]
b i Name part B and give its two functions. [3]
ii Describe how part B can be prepared. [2]
c Namec. [2]


d part D and give its two functions. [3]
the three standard conditions for the measurement of a standard electrode


potential. [3]


[Total: 15]


The diagram shows an electrochemical cell involving two metal / metal ion systems.
  


    


  


high-resistance
voltmeter


salt bridge

 
100 cm?
beaker


copper foil
1.00 mol
1.00 mol solution of
solution of silver nitrate



sulfate ~ silver foil

The standard electrode potentials for the half-cells are:


Agt +e =Ag = +0.80 V
+ = Cu = +0.34V
a value for the cell voltage. Show your working. [2]


b the balanced ionic equation for the overall cell reaction. [2]


reaction:
i Name the substance that is oxidised. Explain your answer. [1]
ii Name the substance that is reduced. Explain your answer. [1]


iii the direction in which the electrons flow. Explain your answer. [2]
contents of the Cu2* / Cu half-cell are diluted with water. The contents of the Ag* /
Ag half-cell are kept the same. State what effect this will have on the value of the cell


voltage, Explain your answer. [3]


[Total: 11]


IMPORTANT
Question 2, part c, involves three questions in which you have two choices of answer. To be


sure of getting your answers the right way round, apply the rules carefully.
To start with, the half-cell with the more positive E® value will attract and accept electrons, so
reduction takes place here. Remember OIL RIG: Oxidation Is Loss, Reduction Is Gain (of


electrons).

 
3 Define the term standard electrode potential. [3]

a labelled diagram to show how the standard electrode potential of a half-cell


containing chlorine gas and chloride ions can be measured. [5]


Write a half-equation for this half-cell. [1]
standard electrode potential of a / half-cell is +1.36 V. This / half-cell
was connected to a standard half-cell containing solid iodine in equilibrium with iodide


ions. The standard electrode potential of an / half-cell is +0.54 V.


i Calculate the standard cell voltage for this cell. [1]
ii Write the balanced ionic equation for the overall cell reaction. [2]


[Total: 12]


IMPORTANT


Question 3, part a, asks for another definition! Make sure you learn these. Question 3, part b,
includes the word ‘standard’, so don’t forget standard conditions when you are labelling. This


is also relevant for several of the other questions that follow.


 
4 Inthe presence of acid, the ion is a powerful oxidising agent. The half-


equation for its reduction in acid solution is:


+ 8H*(aq) + = + ES = +1.51V
i Explain why the presence of an acid is necessary for the to function as


an oxidising agent. [1]


Give two reasons for the MnO,~(aq) acting as an oxidising agent in acidic solution. [2]

ions are oxidised to iodine according to the half-cell equation:
+ = = +0.54V


i Explain why an acidified solution of ions can be used to oxidise
iodide ions to iodine. [5]


Write the balanced equation for this reaction. [2]


[Total: 10]
5 bromine is added to an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. The following


reaction takes place.

+ > + E® cell = +0.53 V
two half-equations for this reaction. [2]



a labelled diagram to show two linked half-cells that could be used to measure the


standard cell potential for this reaction.
standard cell potential for this reaction is +0.53 V. State whether the position of


equilibrium favours the reactants or the products. Explain your answer.


standard electrode potentials for a number of half-equations are shown below:
+ = = +0.77V
+ = =
+ = Ni(s)


+ = =
Give the name of an atom or ion in this list that will reduce iodine to iodide ions. Explain


your answer.


[Total:

list below gives the standard electrode potentials for five half-reactions.
+ 2e7 = Cu(s) = +0.34V


+ 2e7 = Fe(s) = -0.44
+ = Fe2*(aq)
+ 2e7 = = +0.54V

+ = Zn(s) =


Define standard electrode potential.
Give the name of the species in the list which is:
i the strongest oxidising agent


ii the strongest reducing agent.


was set up as shown below.
      


      


voltmeter
copper


rod


  


salt bridge

Cu2*,


platinum


 
i Calculate the standard cell potential of this cell.
ii State the direction of the electron flow in the external circuit. Explain your answer.


an equation for the complete cell reaction.
The concentration of ions in the left-hand electrode was increased from 1.00
mol to 1.30 mol The concentration of ions in the right-hand cell was not


changed.
State the effect of this change on the E value of the / Cu half-cell.


ii State the effect of this change on the E value for the complete electrochemical cell.
Explain why the direction of the cell reaction is unlikely to be altered by this change
in concentration.
[Total:
current of 1.04 A was passed through a solution of dilute sulfuric acid for


6.00 min.
The volume of hydrogen produced at r.t.p. was 43.5


the number of coulombs of charge transferred during the experiment.
b the number of coulombs of charge required to liberate 1 mole of hydrogen gas.


(F = 96 500 C
another experiment, copper(II) sulfate was electrolysed using copper electrodes.


Copper was deposited at the cathode.


i Write a half-equation for this reaction.
ii A learner conducted an experiment to calculate a value for the Faraday constant, F.
An electric current of 0.300 A was passed through the solution of sulfate
for exactly 40 minutes. 0.240 g of copper was deposited at the cathode. Use this
information to calculate a value for F. Express your answer to 3 significant figures.


(A, value: [Cu] = 63.5)
The charge on one electron is approximately 1.60 x C. Use this information


and your answer to part ii to calculate a value for the Avogadro constant.


[7]


[4]
[4]


17]


[3]
[1]


[1]
[1]
[2]


[2]
[1]


[1]
[1]


13]


[1]


[2]


[1]


[3]


[2]


[Total: 9]
8 An aqueous solution of silver nitrate is electrolysed.
aii Explain why silver rather than hydrogen is produced at the cathode.
ii Write an equation for the reaction occurring at the cathode.


b Write an equation for the reaction occurring at the anode.
ii whether the anode reaction is an oxidation or reduction reaction. Explain


your answer.


Explain why the silver nitrate solution becomes acidic during this electrolysis.
Calculate the mass of silver deposited at the cathode when the electrolysis is carried out


for exactly 35 min using a current of 0.18 A. (A,[Ag] = 108; F = 96 500 C
[Total:
The reaction taking place in an electrochemical cell under standard conditions is


+ > + Ag(s)
two half-equations for this reaction. For each, state whether oxidation or reduction


is occurring.
standard electrode potential for the half-cell containing and Fe?*(aq) is


[oxidised form]


the relationship = +


 


 


[reduced form]
to calculate the electrode potential at 298 K if the concentration of is 0.02


mol dm-3 and the concentration of Fe?*(aq) is 0.1 mol
ii Use the relationship above to explain why the standard electrode potential for the
half-cell containing and is always +0.77 V if there are equimolar


concentrations of and Fe?*(aq).
[2]
[1]


[1]
[1]


[3]
[3]


11]


[2]

[3]
[2]



standard electrode potential for the half-cell containing Ag*(aq) and Ag(s) is +0.80



Calculate the electrode potential at 298 K if the concentration of is 0.05 mol dm


[2]
your results to parts b i and c to predict whether the reaction + Ag*(aq) >
Fe?*(aq) + Ag(s) is likely to occur at the concentrations 0.05 mol


(aq) 0.1 mol and Ag*(aq) 0.05 mol Explain your answer. [4]


[Total: 13]
10 Concentrated aqueous sodium chloride can be electrolysed in the laboratory using


graphite electrodes.


the formulae for all the ions present in an aqueous solution of sodium chloride. [2]


half-equations to show the reactions at:
the anode (positive electrode) [1]
ii the cathode (negative electrode). [1]
why the reaction at the anode is classed as oxidation. [1]


d_ a while, the solution near the cathode becomes very alkaline. Explain why. [3]
e The chlorine produced at the anode can react with warm concentrated sodium


hydroxide:


Clp + 6NaOH + +


Deduce the oxidation number changes per atom of chlorine when
is converted to NaCl [1]
ii is converted to NaClO3. [1]


f the systematic name for the compound [1]


[Total: 11]


 


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


Ican section... more work there move on
predict the identity of the substance liberated during 20.2, 20.3


electrolysis from the state of electrolyte (molten or aqueous)
predict the identity of the substance liberated during
electrolysis from the position of the ions (in the electrolyte) in


the redox series (electrode potential)
predict the identity of the substance liberated during
electrolysis from the concentration of the ions in the


electrolyte
state and apply the relationship, F = Le, between the Faraday
constant, F, the Avogadro constant, L, and the charge on the


electron, e


 
calculate quantity of charge passed during electrolysis


using Q =
describe methods used to measure the standard electrode
potentials of metals or non-metals in contact with their ions in


aqueous solution
describe methods used to measure the standard electrode
potentials of ions of the same element in different oxidation

states


calculate a standard cell potential by combining two standard
20.6
electrode potentials
use standard cell potential to deduce the polarity of each
electrode and the direction of electron flow in the external 20.6
circuit of a simple cell
use standard cell potential to predict the feasibility of a 20.6
reaction.
deduce from standard electrode potential values the relative
reactivity of elements, compounds and ions as oxidising

agents or reducing agents
construct redox equations using the relevant half-equations

predict qualitatively how the value of an electrode potential

varies with the concentration of the aqueous ion

use the Nernst equation to predict quantitatively how the


value of an electrode potential varies with the concentration of | 20.6

the aqueous ions



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Write down the definition of a Bransted-Lowry acid and base. Compare your


definitions with those of another learner.
Work with another learner. Take it in turns to explain the meaning of the terms: equilibrium,
equilibrium constant, dissociation, strong acid, strong base, weak acid, weak base, neutralisation. If


you do not agree with each other or are both not sure, check with a textbook or the internet.
Make a list of strong acids and weak acids and strong bases and weak bases. Compare your lists


with the rest of the class.
Get another learner to select a weak acid from Table 21.2. You then both write an equilibrium
expression for this acid. Note that the process is the same as for writing equilibrium expressions for


K, that you used in Chapter 8. The only difference is you put K, instead of


Explain to another learner why the equation H* + OH~ > applies to any acid-alkali reaction.
Write a paragraph describing how to carry out an experiment to find the enthalpy change of


neutralisation of an acid by an alkali. Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Work with another learner. Take it in turns to explain the meaning of the terms: solute, solution,
salt, sparingly soluble, polarisation, non-polar, enthalpy change, hydration. you do not agree or


are not sure, check with a textbook or the internet.


GETTING RID OF THE HARDNESS


 
Figure 21.1: In a hard water area, enough limescale is formed in water pipes, kettles and boilers in your house to fill


a small bucket!


 
When you add soap solution to a bottle of water and shake it, soap bubbles may form. We say that the
sample of water is ‘soft’. If a greasy solid (scum) forms on the surface of the water and the water looks
milky, we say that the water is ‘hard’ (Figure 21.1). Hard water is caused by dissolved calcium
hydrogencarbonate, magnesium hydrogencarbonate or magnesium sulfate. The scum is an insoluble


compound of calcium or magnesium ions with the long-chain carboxylic acids present in soap.
When hard water is boiled, the soluble hydrogencarbonates change to insoluble carbonates:

CaCO3(s) + +
Carbonates of calcium and magnesium can build up in kettles, boilers and water pipes and cause



many problems. There are several ways of softening hard water. One way is to use an ion-exchange


resin to remove calcium ions. The resin consists of an insoluble polymer which is packed in a column.
The polymer contains negatively charged groups along its chain. We can represent these as
where R is part of the polymer chain. If we wash the resin with sodium chloride, the sodium


ions are attracted to the groups. When the ion-exchange resin is connected to the water supply
coming into the house, the calcium or magnesium ions in the hard water are exchanged for the sodium

ions in an equilibrium reaction.

+ = + 2Nat(aq)
The position of equilibrium is in favour of the products. So the positive calcium ions form ionic bonds
with the negative charges on the resin and the sodium ions are released. The sodium ions are soluble

in hot water, so no solid is formed on boiling the water.

Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e Work with another learner to make a list of the disadvantages of hard water.


e Use textbooks or the internet to find out some other ways of making the water softer.
e Use the ion-exchange equation shown above to suggest how you could convert the resin back to its


original form.


 


21.1 Conjugate acids and conjugate bases
In Chapter 8, we considered acids and bases in terms of the theory. Acids are proton


donors and bases are proton acceptors.
In a reaction at equilibrium, products are being converted to reactants at the same rate as reactants are
being converted to products. The reverse reaction can also be considered in terms of the


theory of acids and bases.
Consider the reaction:


NH3(g) + +
In the reverse reaction, the NH,* ion donates a proton to the ion. So NH,* is acting as an acid and OH


is acting as a base.


H* donated


+ +


base acid acid base
If a reactant is linked to a product by the transfer of a proton we call this pair a conjugate pair. Consider


the following reaction:


conjugate pair


 


+ + Cl (aq)


acid base acid base
conjugate pair
Looking at the forward reaction:
is the conjugate base of the acid HCl
is the conjugate acid of the base H20.
Looking at the reverse reaction:
HCI is the conjugate acid of the base


H20 is the conjugate base of the acid H30*.


In a conjugate pair, the acid has one proton more than its conjugate base.
The conjugate pairs for the equilibrium between ammonia and water to form ammonium ions and


hydroxide ions are:


conjugate pair


 


+ + OH (aq)


base | acid 2 acid | base 2


The idea of conjugate acids and bases is sometimes called the acid 1 / base 1, acid 2 / base 2 concept.

 
conjugate pair


Question
Identify the acid and the base on the right-hand side of these equilibria.
i + HCOOH = + HCOOH2*


+
the acid on the right-hand side of this equation which is conjugate with the base on the


left-hand side.


CH3NH + = CH3NH3* +


The ionic product of water, Ky
Water is able to act as either an acid (by donating protons, H*) or a base (by accepting protons). In pure


water, the following equilibrium exists.


H* donated
+ = H,O*(aq) +
acid base
We can simplify this equation by writing hydroxonium ions, as simple hydrogen ions,
= +


The equilibrium expression for this reaction is:


Ke=


IMPORTANT
Remember that one use of square brackets is to indicate the concentration of the substance inside the


brackets.


 
The extent of ionisation of water is very low. The concentration of hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions in pure
water (and hence the value of K,) is extremely small. Because of this, we can regard the concentration of


water as being constant.
We can therefore incorporate this into the value of The equilibrium expression then becomes:
Ky = [H*]


K,, is called the ionic product of water. Its value at 298 K is 1.00 x
We can use this equation to find the hydrogen ion concentration in pure water; for simplicity we will now
omit the state symbol(aq). For each molecule of water that ionises, one Ht ion and one ion are


produced.
=


We can rewrite the equilibrium expression


Ky = [H*] [OH7]


 
Ky =


Rearranging this equation to find the hydrogen ion concentration [H*] in pure water:


[H*] = /Ky = x = 1.00 x


21.2 pH calculations
We know that the lower the hydrogen ion concentration, the higher the pH. The pH values of some familiar


aqueous solutions are shown in Table 21.1.

hydrochloric acid (1.00 mol

stomach ‘juices’ (contains

lemon juice

vinegar


rainwater (normal)
milk of magnesia
soapy water (cheap soap!)


bench sodium hydroxide (1.00 mol


Table 21.1: pH values of some familiar aqueous solutions.


 


 
The range of possible hydrogen ion concentrations in different solutions is very large. It can range from
10715 mol to 10 mol In order to overcome the problem of dealing with a wide range of


numbers, the Danish chemist introduced the pH scale.
PH is defined as the negative logarithm to base 10 of the hydrogen ion concentration. In symbols this is


written:
PH = [H*]


Note:


the negative sign is introduced to make the pH values positive in most cases
the logarithms used are to the base 10 (not to the base e), so make sure that when doing calculations,


you press the ‘log’ or ‘Ig’ button on your calculator (not the ‘In’ button)


use this equation to convert [H*] to pH or pH to [H*]


Calculating pH values from [H*]


Here is an example of the use of logarithms to calculate pH from hydrogen ion concentrations.
Use your own calculator to check that you can get the correct answer. Try it several times. If you cannot get
this answer (3.27) check with your calculator’s instruction booklet, or find your teacher or a member of


your teaching group to work with to solve this problem.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 

the pH of a solution whose H* ion concentration is 5.32 x mol
Solution



pH = [H*]
=


 
Question
2 the pH of the following solutions:
= 3.00 x 10-4 mol
b = 1.00 x mol
= 4.00 x 10-8 mol
= 5.40 x mol


e = 7.80 x mol
You should notice that the solutions in Question 2, parts c, d and e, are alkalis. They all have pH values
greater than 7. Even though they are alkalis, they each have a small concentration of ions, and this
concentration is used to calculate the pH. They each have a small concentration of Ht ions because =
+ is an equilibrium. Even when there is an excess of ions, there is still a small concentration
of Ht ions. In the same way, the solutions in Question 2, parts a and b, have a small concentration of


ions, even though the solutions are acids.


Calculating [H*] from pH
Here is an example of the use of logarithms to calculate hydrogen ion concentration from pH. Use your own


calculator to check that you get the correct answers.


Question


3 the concentration of hydrogen ions in solutions having the following pH values:

3.70
c pH 11.2



The pH of strong acids
Monobasic acids contain only one replaceable hydrogen atom per molecule. Strong monobasic acids such
as hydrochloric acid are completely ionised in solution. It follows from this that the concentration of
hydrogen ions in solution is approximately the same as the concentration of the acid (Figure 21.2). (We
assume here that the concentration of H* ions we get from the ionisation of water molecules is very small


compared with the concentration of ions we get from the acid.)


 


Figure 21.2: A pH electrode allows us to determine pH accurately.

 

pH of 0.1 mol is
-log (1 x mol =

pH of 0.01 mol is
-log (1 x 10-2 mol = pH 2


¢ pH of 0.001 mol is


-log (1 x 10-3 mol = pH 3


WORKED EXAMPLE
the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution whose pH is 10.5.
Solution
pH = [H*]

=


= 3.16 mol
Use your own calculator to check that you can get the correct answer. Try it several times. If you
cannot get this answer (3.16 x check with your calculator’s instruction booklet, or ask your


teacher or a member of your teaching group to work with to solve this problem.


 
Diluting the acid ten times reduces the value of the H* ion concentration to one-tenth and increases the pH


by a value of one.


Calculating the pH of strong bases


IMPORTANT
The ionic product for water is given by the equation Ky = You can rearrange this to


calculate the hydroxide ion concentration if you know and [H*].


 


Note: You will not be expected to remember anything about the basic dissociation constant Ky.
Strong bases, such as sodium hydroxide, ionise completely in solution. The concentration of hydroxide ions
in a solution of sodium hydroxide is therefore approximately the same as the concentration of the sodium


hydroxide.

To calculate the pH of a solution of strong base we need to know:
the concentration of OH™ ions in solution



e the equilibrium expression for the ionisation of water:

Ky


the value of Ky for water.


As =



=


We can calculate the [H*] and then calculate the pH.
    
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
   


  


WORKED EXAMPLE


Calculate the pH of a solution of sodium hydroxide of concentration 0.0500 mol
Ky = 1.00 x mol? (at 298 K)
Solution


Step 1: write the expression relating to Ky and



=


 


Step 2: Substitute the values into the expression to calculate [H*].
+]


= 0.0500
= 2.00 x mol
Step 3: Calculate the pH.
PH = [H*]
= (2.00 x 10-13)

A quick way to get the same answer is to:
find (here = (0.0500) = 1.3)
subtract this value from 14 (in this example 14 - 1.3 = 12.7).


This works because [H*] - = 14.
 


 


Question
the pH of the following strong acids and strong bases:
mol
b mol
an aqueous solution containing 3.00 g HCI per dm?


d 00 mol dm=3 KOH (Ky = 1.00 x mol?


aqueous solution containing 0.200 g of NaOH per dm? (K,, = 1.00 x 1074 mol?
21.3 Weak acids: using the acid dissociation


constant,


K, and pK,
We can apply the equilibrium law (see Section 8.3) to aqueous solutions of weak acids and weak bases. For


example, when ethanoic acid dissolves in water the following equilibrium results:
CH3COOH(aq) + = H30*(aq) +
We can simplify this equation to:


CH;COOH(aq) = H*(aq) + (aq)
ethanoic acid ethanoate ion


The equilibrium expression for this reaction is:



K, is called the acid dissociation constant. At 298 K, the value of K, for the dissociation of ethanoic acid


is 1.74 x mol
The units of K, are determined in the same way as for K, (see Section 8.3). For the dissociation of a


monobasic acid the units are mol
We can write the general formula for a monobasic acid as HA. The balanced equation for the partial


ionisation of this weak acid is:
HA(aq) Ht(aq) +


The general equilibrium expression applying to a monobasic acid then becomes:




 




Figure 21.3: Friedrich Ostwald (1853-1932) was a German chemist who developed the idea of ‘degree of dissociation’ of
weak acids and bases. He was one of the most well-known physical chemists of his day. But strangely enough, he didn’t


accept the atomic theory until 1906.


 


The value of indicates the extent of dissociation of the acid (Figure 21.3).
Ahigh value for K, (for example, 40 mol indicates that the position of equilibrium lies to the


right. The acid is almost completely ionised.


A low value for K, (for example, 1.0 x 10-4 mol indicates that the position of equilibrium lies to
the left. The acid is only slightly ionised and exists mainly as HA molecules and comparatively few H*


and ions.
As K, values for many acids are very low, we can use pK, values to compare their strengths.


= -logioKa
Table 21.2 shows the range of values of K, and pK, for various acids. Note that the less positive the value


of the more strongly acidic is the acid.


hydrated Fe3+ ion +


Table 21.2: Acid dissociation constants, for a range of acids, for aqueous solutions in the region of 0.0-0.01 mol


 


 


IMPORTANT
Remember that a small ‘p’ in front of a symbol related to acids and bases means the negative


logarithm (to the base 10).


So pH is and pK, =


 
Question


5 Write equilibrium expressions for the following reactions:


H*(aq) +
= +


+ NH3(aq)
at Table 21.2. For the following acids or ions (shown in the left-hand column), work out which


species in the equilibrium are acids and which are their conjugate bases:
hydrated ion
acid


acid


ion
Calculating K, for a weak acid


We can calculate the value of K, for a weak acid if we know:
the concentration of the acid


the pH of the solution.
From the general equation:


HA(aq) H* +
we can see that for each molecule of HA that ionises, one Ht ion and one ion are produced. (This


assumes that we ignore the H* ions we get from the ionisation of water.)


 
[H*] =
We can rewrite the equilibrium expression

Ka=
as
_


In order to calculate the value of K, we make two assumptions:
the concentration of hydrogen ions produced by the ionisation of the water molecules
present in the solution. This is reasonable because the ionic product of water (1.00 x mol?


is negligible compared with the values for most weak acids (see Table 21.2).
that the ionisation of the weak acid is so small that the concentration of undissociated HA


molecules present at equilibrium is approximately the same as that of the original acid.
Worked example 4 shows how to calculate the value of K, using the pH and the concentration of the weak


acid.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
4 Calculate the value of K, for methanoic acid. A solution of 0.010 mol methanoic acid, HCOOH,


has a pH of 2.90.


Solution
Step pH to
[H*]


= 1.26 x mol dm-3


Step 2: Write the equilibrium expression.
_ _


or HA]

 



Step 3: Enter the values into the expression and calculate the answer.
(1.26 x


(0.010)


= 1.59 x 10-4 mol


Ky =


 


Question
6 Calculate the value of K, for the following acids:
mol 2-aminobenzoic acid, which has a pH of 4.30
mol propanoic acid, which has a pH of 3.10


mol 2-nitrophenol, which has a pH of 4.10


b pK, values for each of the acids in part a.
Calculating the pH of a weak acid

We can calculate the pH value (or [H*]) of a weak acid if we know:

the concentration of the acid


e the value of K, for the acid.
Again, we make the same assumptions about the concentration of hydrogen ions produced by the


ionisation of water and the equilibrium concentration of the weak acid. The value of the pH calculated will
not be significantly affected by these factors unless we require great accuracy (for example, calculating pH


to the third decimal place).


Worked example 5 shows how to calculate pH from the value of K, and concentration of the weak acid.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
Calculate the pH of 0.100 mol ethanoic acid,
= 1.74 x 1075 mol


Solution
Step 1: Write the equilibrium expression for the reaction.
CH3COOH(aq) =
+



 


 


 


or


Step the values into the expression.



1.74 x


[0.100]


 
Step 3: Rearrange the equation.


= = 1.74
Step 4: Take the square root.


[H*] = x = 1.32 x 1073 mol
Step 5: Calculate pH.


pH =
= x


= 2.88 (to 3 significant figures)

 


Question
7 the data from Table 21.2 to work out the pH values of the following solutions:
mol dm~? aqueous benzoic acid

b mol hydrated aluminium ions
€ 0.100 mol aqueous methanoic acid.


21.4 Buffer solutions


What is a buffer solution?
A buffer solution is a solution in which the pH does not change significantly when small amounts of acids


or alkalis are added. A buffer solution is used to keep pH (almost) constant.
A buffer solution is either a weak acid and its conjugate base or a weak base and its conjugate acid, which


minimises any change in pH when an acid or alkali is added.
One type of buffer solution is a mixture of a weak acid and one of its salts. An example is an aqueous
mixture of ethanoic acid and sodium ethanoate. Mixtures of ethanoic acid and sodium ethanoate in
different proportions act as buffers between pH values of 4 and 7. We can understand how a buffer solution


works by referring to the equilibria involved (Figure 21.4).
Ethanoic acid is a weak acid. So it stays mostly in the un-ionised form (CH3COOH) and only gives rise to a


low concentration of ethanoate ions in solution:


= + (aq)


ethanoic acid ethanoate ion


Sodium ethanoate is fully ionised in aqueous solution:


+ aq Na* (aq) + CH3COO


sodium ethanoate ethanoate ion


 
Figure 21.4: The pH of this agar plate for growing bacteria is kept constant by using a buffer solution. The buffer solution


is added into the agar jelly used to make the plate.


 
The buffer solution contains relatively high concentrations of both CH3COOH and We say that


there are reserve supplies of the acid (CH3COOH) and its conjugate base (CH3COO7). The pH of a buffer
solution depends on the ratio of the concentration of the acid and the concentration of its conjugate base.


If this does not change very much, the pH changes very little.


In the buffer solution ethanoic acid molecules are in equilibrium with hydrogen ions and ethanoate ions:


= H* (aq) + CH3
relatively high relatively high
concentration of concentration of


ethanoic acid ethanoate ions


We can use this equation to explain how buffer solutions work.
An increase in hydrogen ion concentration would greatly lower the pH of water, but when ions are


added to the buffer solution:
addition of H* ions shifts the position of equilibrium to the left because Ht ions combine with


ions to form more CH3COOH until equilibrium is re-established
e the large reserve supply of ensures that the concentration of ions in solution does


not change significantly
e the large reserve supply of CH3COOH ensures that the concentration of molecules in solution


does not change significantly


so the pH does not change significantly.
An increase in hydroxide ion concentration would greatly increase the pH of water, but when ions are


added to the buffer solution:


the added ions combine with ions to form water


this reduces the H* ion concentration
the position of equilibrium shifts to the right


so CH3COOH molecules ionise to form more H* and CH3COO7 ions until equilibrium is re-established
e the large reserve supply of CH3COOH ensures that the concentration of CH3COOH molecules in solution


does not change significantly
e the large reserve supply of ensures that the concentration of ions in solution does


not change significantly


so the pH does not change significantly.
In unpolluted regions of the Earth, rainwater has a pH of 5.7. This is because carbon dioxide dissolves in
the rainwater to form a dilute solution of the weak acid carbonic acid, This acid and its conjugate
base, act as a buffer solution. It minimises changes in pH if very small amounts of acid or alkali are
added to the rainwater. But in regions where there is pollution caused by the emission of acidic oxides of
nitrogen and sulfur, the pH of the rainwater falls to around 4. The rainwater can no longer act as a buffer
because the concentrations of the and are not high enough to cope with the large amounts


of acidic pollution involved.
No buffer solution can cope with the excessive addition of acids or alkalis. If very large amounts of acid or


alkali are added, the pH will change significantly.
Buffer solutions that resist changes in pH in alkaline regions are usually a mixture of a weak base and its


conjugate acid. An example is a mixture of ammonia with ammonium chloride.
Aqueous ammonia is a weak base, so there is only a low concentration of ammonium ions in ammonia


solution:


NH3(aq) + = +
Ammonium chloride is fully ionised in aqueous solution. This supplies the reserve supplies of the conjugate


acid, NH,*.


NH,Cl(aq) +


Question
8 mixture of 0.500 mol aqueous ammonia and 0.500 mol ammonium chloride acts as a


buffer solution.
Explain how this buffer solution minimises changes in pH on addition of
i dilute hydrochloric acid


sodium hydroxide.


b why dilute ammonia alone will not act as a buffer solution.

Calculating the pH of a buffer solution

We can calculate the pH of a buffer solution if we know:

e the K, of the weak acid


the equilibrium concentration of the weak acid and its conjugate base (salt).

To do the calculation, we use the equilibrium expression for the particular reaction.
We can make the numbers easier to deal with in calculations involving buffer solutions by using logarithms
throughout. So instead of using the expression:


[acid]



= Ka x


 


we can use the expression:


pH = pk, +


[acid]


IMPORTANT


Remember that in the expression



x


for the buffer solution


HCOOH = + Ht
e the salt contains the


and HCOOH are a conjugate pair.


 
Questions


9 Calculate the pH of the following buffer solutions:


i 0.0500 mol methanoic acid and 0.100 mol sodium methanoate.


(K, of methanoic acid = 1.60 x mol


ii mol benzoic acid and 0.0400 mol sodium benzoate.


of benzoic acid = 6.3 x mol
b many moles of sodium ethanoate must be added to 1.00 dm? of 0.100 mol ethanoic


acid to produce a buffer solution of pH 4.90? (K, of ethanoic acid = 1.74 x mol
Tip: first find the hydrogen ion concentration, then rearrange the equilibrium expression to make


[(sodium) ethanoate] the subject of the expression.
10 What is the pH of a buffer solution made by mixing 100 cm? of 0.1 mol methanoic acid with 50
cm? 0.1 mol sodium methanoate?


K, (HCOOH) = 1.6 x 10-4
A

C


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
6 Calculate the pH of a buffer solution containing 0.600 mol propanoic acid and 0.800 mol


sodium propanoate.
propanoic acid = 1.35 x mol


Solution


Step 1: Write the equilibrium expression.


Step Rearrange the equilibrium expression to make [H*] the subject.


K, x



=
Note that in this expression, the ratio determining and hence pH, is the ratio of the


concentration of the acid to the salt (conjugate base).
Step 3: Substitute the data given.
0.600
1-35
x 1075 mol
Step 4: Calculate the pH.
pH =
= x 1075)
= -(-4.99)


= 4.99


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 21.1


Making a buffer solution
We make buffer solutions by adding a solution of a weak acid to its conjugate base or a weak base to
its conjugate acid until we get the pH that is required. The more concentrated the acid and conjugate


base, the more effective is the buffer solution at preventing a change in pH.


Put 50 cm? of 0.1 mol ethanoic acid in a small beaker.
Add a spatula-ful of sodium ethanoate and stir with a glass rod until the sodium ethanoate


dissolves.
Add a few drops of universal indicator solution to give a definite colour and determine the pH using


the indicator colour chart. (Alternatively, use a pH meter.)
Label the beaker ‘buffer solution’.


To a second beaker add 1 drop of 1.0 mol hydrochloric acid and 50 cm? distilled water.
Add a few drops of universal indicator solution and then dilute the solution very gradually with more
distilled water until you get the same pH as the pH of the buffer solution. You may need to add


more indicator to get the same colour intensity as the buffer solution.


Label the beaker ‘unbuffered solution’.
Add one drop of 0.1 mol sodium hydroxide to each of the beakers. Observe what happens.
Add a further drop of sodium hydroxide one at a time, to each of the beakers. Which solution is best


at resisting pH change?


 


Uses of buffer solutions
Buffer solutions play an important part in many industrial processes, including electroplating, the
manufacture of dyes and in the treatment of leather. They are also used to make sure that pH meters


record the correct pH.
Many animals depend on buffers to keep a constant pH in various parts of their bodies. In humans, the pH


of the blood is kept between 7.35 and 7.45 by a number of different buffers in the blood:
hydrogencarbonate ions,


haemoglobin and plasma proteins

dihydrogenphosphate and hydrogenphosphate ions.
The pH of the blood is often checked by doctors as it can give information which helps identify problems in


the workings of the body (Figure 21.5).
The cells in our body produce carbon dioxide as a product of aerobic respiration (the oxidation of glucose to
provide energy). Carbon dioxide combines with water in the blood to form a solution containing hydrogen


ions.


+ = Ht(aq) +


hydrogencarbonate ion
This reaction is catalysed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. When the blood passes through the small
blood vessels around our lungs, hydrogencarbonate ions are rapidly converted to carbon dioxide and water.


The carbon dioxide escapes into the lungs.
The production of H* ions, if left unchecked, would lower the pH of the blood and cause ‘acidosis’. This may
disrupt some body functions and eventually lead to coma. The equilibrium between carbon dioxide and

hydrogencarbonate is the most important buffering system in the blood.

If the H* ion concentration increases:

the position of this equilibrium shifts to the left
H* ions combine with ions to form carbon dioxide and water until equilibrium is restored


e this reduces the concentration of hydrogen ions in the blood and helps keep the pH constant.


If the H* ion concentration decreases:
the position of this equilibrium shifts to the right


* some carbon dioxide and water combine to form and HCO37 ions until equilibrium is restored


this increases the concentration of hydrogen ions in the blood and helps keep the pH constant.


 


Figure 21.5: Anaesthetists monitor the pH of a patient’s blood.


 


Questions
11 One of the buffers in blood plasma is a mixture of dihydrogenphosphate ions and


hydrogenphosphate ions


i Identify the conjugate acid and base in this buffer.


ii Write a balanced equation for the equilibrium between these two ions.
b proteins in the blood can act as buffers. The equation below shows a simplified equilibrium
equation for this reaction.


(Pr = protein)

H* +
Explain how this system can act as a buffer to prevent the blood getting too acidic.


21.5 Equilibrium and solubility
In Chapter 4 we learned that most ionic compounds dissolve in water. In Chapter 19 we related solubility to
enthalpy change of solution. Some ionic compounds, however, are insoluble or only slightly soluble in
water. But even ‘insoluble’ ionic compounds may dissolve to a very small extent in water. Solubility is
generally quoted as the number of grams or number of moles of compound needed to saturate 100 g or 1


kg of water at a given temperature. We say that a solution is saturated when no more solute dissolves in it.


Sodium chloride is regarded as a soluble salt: a saturated solution contains 36 g per 100 g of water.
chloride is regarded as an insoluble salt: a saturated solution contains 0.99 g per 100 g of


water.
Solubility product


An equilibrium is established when an undissolved ionic compound is in contact with a saturated solution of
its ions. The ions move from the solid to the saturated solution at the same rate as they move from the


solution to the solid (Figure 21.6).


AgCl(aq) a


 



Figure 21.6: An equilibrium is established between solid silver chloride and its saturated solution. The water molecules


are not shown.


 


+


 
When solid silver chloride dissolves, it is in contact with saturated silver chloride solution and the following


equilibrium is set up:
AgCl(s) = +


The equilibrium expression relating to this equation is:


Ke =
For any solid, the concentration of the solid phase remains constant and can be combined with the value of

Ke
So we can write this equilibrium expression as:


Ksp = [Ag*(aq)]
is called the solubility product. Values are quoted at 298 K.


=
where a is the number of CY* cations in one formula unit of the compound and b is the number of


anions in one formula unit of the compound.
So for (which contains ions and ions) the equilibrium is:
+
and the equilibrium expression is:
=


The idea of solubility product only applies to ionic compounds that are slightly soluble.


The units of solubility product depend on the number of each type of ion present in solution. You can work
the units out in the same way as for general equilibrium expressions (see Section 8.3), but you don’t have


to do any cancelling. For example, for the expression:


= [Mg?*(aq)] x
mol x (mol


= mol?
The idea of solubility product is only useful for sparingly soluble salts. The smaller the value of K,, the


lower is the solubility of the salt. Some values of are given in Table 21.3.
AgCl 1.8 x 10710
1.0 x 10732
CoS 2.0 x
6.3 x 10736
7.9 x
Fe2S3 1.0 x 10-88


Hgl2 2.5 x 10726


Table 21.3: Some values of solubility product at 298 K.


1.0 x 10712


 

 


Question
12 Write equilibrium expressions for the solubility products of the following:
i



b the units of solubility product for each of the compounds in part a.
Solubility product calculations


You may be asked to calculate the solubility product of a compound from its solubility, or you may be asked
to calculate the solubility of a compound from its solubility product. An example of each of these types of

calculation is shown in Worked examples 7 and 8.
WORKED EXAMPLES


7 Calculating solubility product from solubility.


A saturated solution of magnesium fluoride, has a solubility of 1.22 x 1073 mol
Calculate the solubility product of magnesium fluoride.


Solution
Step 1: Write down the equilibrium equation.


+


Step 2: Calculate the concentration of each ion in solution.
When 1.22 x mol dissolves to form 1 dm? of solution the concentration of each ion


is:


[Mg2*] = 1.22 x 1073 mol
= 2 x 1.22 x mol

= 2.44 x mol
(The concentration of F~ is 2 x 1.22 x 10-3 mol because each formula unit


contains 2 x ions.)
Step 3: Write down the equilibrium expression.


= [Mg?*]
Step 4: Substitute the values.
Kgp = (1.22 x 1073) x (2.44 x 1073)?


= 7.26 1079
Step 5: Add the correct units.


(mol x (mol = mol?


Answer = 7.26 x mol?
8 Calculating solubility from solubility product.
Calculate the solubility of copper(II) sulfide in mol
for CuS = 6.3 x 10-36 mol?
Solution


Step 1: Write down the equilibrium equation.


CuS(s) Cu2*(aq) +


Step 2: Write the equilibrium expression in terms of one ion only.
From the equilibrium equation


[Cu2*] = [S27]


= becomes Kop =
Step 3: Substitute the value of


(6.3 x 10736) =


Step 4: Calculate the concentration.


In this case we take the square root of
[Cu?*] = ./K,,


=


 


Question
Calculate the solubility product of the following solutions:
aqueous solution of cadmium sulfide, CdS (solubility = 1.46 x mol
aqueous solution of calcium fluoride, containing 0.0168 g CaF
b the solubility in mol of zinc sulfide, ZnS.
(Ksp =1.6 x mol?
Calculate the solubility of silver carbonate,


= 6.3 x
Tip: you have to divide by 4, then take the cube root. Can you see why? You should have a cube


root button on your calculator


Predicting precipitation
We can use the solubility product to predict whether precipitation will occur when two solutions are mixed.
For example, will we get a precipitate when we mix a solution of barium chloride, with a very dilute


solution of sodium carbonate?
Both barium chloride and sodium carbonate are soluble salts, but barium carbonate is relatively insoluble.


We must consider the equilibrium for the insoluble salt dissolving in water:
BaCO3(s) = +
The solubility product is given by:
= = 5.5 x 10710 mol?


[Ba2*] is greater than 5.5 x mol? a precipitate will form.


If [Ba2*] is less than 5.5 x mol? dm~® no precipitate will form (see worked example 9).


IMPORTANT


Remember that solubility product is only relevant for salts which are sparingly (very slightly) soluble.
The concept cannot be used for soluble salts such as sodium chloride. Remember that soluble salts
include salts of Group | elements, all nitrates and ammonium salts and many sulfates. Halides are


generally soluble except for halides and silver halides.


 

The common ion effect
The common ion effect is the reduction in the solubility of a dissolved salt achieved by adding a solution
of a compound that has an ion in common with the dissolved salt. This often results in precipitation (Figure
21.7);


 
Figure 21.7: The shell of this nautilus is composed mainly of calcium carbonate. The nautilus adjusts conditions so shell
material is formed when the concentration of calcium ions and carbonate ions in seawater are high enough to precipitate


calcium carbonate.


 
An example of the common ion effect can be seen when we add a solution of sodium chloride to a


saturated solution of silver chloride and silver chloride precipitates. Why is this?
    
   
   
 
  


    


WORKED EXAMPLES
9 Willa precipitate form if we mix equal volumes of solutions of 1.00 x mol and

5.00 x 10-5 mol

Solution

mol


= 2.50 x mol
[Ba2*] = (2.50 x 1075) x (5.00 x 1075)


This value is greater than the solubility product, so a precipitate of barium carbonate forms.


In a saturated solution of silver chloride in water, we have the following equilibrium:
AgCl(s) Ag*(aq) +


We now add a solution of sodium chloride:
e the chloride ion is common to both sodium chloride and silver chloride
e the added chloride ions shift the position of equilibrium to the left


e silver chloride is precipitated.
The addition of the common ion, has reduced the solubility of the silver chloride because its solubility
product has been exceeded. When [Ag*] is greater than the for silver chloride, a precipitate will


form.
The solubility of an ionic compound in aqueous solution containing a common ion is less than its solubility


in water.
For example, the solubility of barium sulfate, in water is 1.0 x mol and the solubility of


barium sulfate in 0.100 mol sulfuric acid, is only 1.0 x 10-9 mol


We can explain the lower solubility in sulfuric acid by referring to the solubility product of barium sulfate:


= = 1.0 x mol?
If we ignore the very small amount of from the barium sulfate then is 0.1 mol


(from the sulfuric acid). This gives:


1.0 x = [Ba?*] x [0.1]


[Ba2+] = 1.0 x mol


Questions
14 chloride is a salt that is sparingly soluble in water. When hydrochloric acid is added to
a saturated solution of chloride, a precipitate is formed. Explain why a precipitate is


formed.
sulfate is a sparingly soluble salt that can be made by mixing solutions containing
calcium and sulfate ions. A 0.00100 mol solution of aqueous calcium chloride, CaCly, is


mixed with an equal volume of 0.00100 mol solution of aqueous sodium sulfate,
i Calculate the concentration of calcium and sulfate ions when equal volumes of these


solutions of calcium chloride and sodium sulfate are mixed.


ii Will a precipitate of calcium sulfate form?
of calcium sulfate = 2.0 x 10-5 mol?
one of these is the correct numerical value for the solubility product for bismuth sulfide Bi,S3?
Solubility of = 3.6 x mol
6.53 x
B 1.30 x
C

D
4.35


21.6 Partition coefficients
The principle of partition of a solute between two solvents helps us to understand more fully how we
separate the components in a mixture in chromatography (see Section 30.1). Let us consider ammonia
dissolved in two immiscible solvents. Immiscible solvents are solvents that do not dissolve in each other


and so form two separate layers (Figure 21.8).


   
separating
~ funnel
organic
‘organic


solvent


solvent)


water
Figure 21.8: Ammonia (the solute) dissolves in both the solvents, water and the organic solvent. A state of dynamic


equilibrium is established.

 


A separating funnel is shaken with the organic solvent and an aqueous solution of ammonia. The ammonia
is soluble in both solvents so when the mixture is left to settle, a dynamic equilibrium is established. At this
point, ammonia molecules are moving from the aqueous layer to the organic layer at the same rate as they


are moving from the organic layer to the aqueous layer:


NH3(aq) = NH3(organic solvent)
We can calculate a value for the equilibrium constant (see Section 8.3). We call this the partition
coefficient, The partition coefficient is the equilibrium constant that relates the concentration of a


solute partitioned between two immiscible solvents at a particular temperature.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
10 100 of a 0.100 mol solution of ammonia in water at 20 °C was shaken with 50 of an


organic solvent and left in a separating funnel for equilibrium to be established.
A 20.0 portion of the aqueous layer was run off and titrated against 0.200 mol dilute


hydrochloric acid. The end-point was found to be 9.40 of acid.
What is the partition coefficient of ammonia between these two solvents at 20 °C?


Solution
The alkaline ammonia solution is neutralised by dilute hydrochloric acid:
NH3(aq) + HCl(aq)


1 mole of ammonia reacts with 1 mole of the acid. In the titration we used:
9.40


0-200 moles of


= 1.88 x 1073 moles
This reacts with ammonia in the ratio 1 : 1 so there must be 1.88 x moles of NH3 in the 20.0


portion titrated.


Therefore, in the 100 cm? aqueous layer there are
100


1.88 x mol


x 1073 mol
The number of moles of ammonia in the organic layer must be equal to the initial number of moles


of ammonia minus the amount left in the aqueous layer at equilibrium.


initial number of moles of ammonia
= 100 _


x = 0.0100 mol


final number of moles of ammonia in organic layer
= 0.0100 - 9.40 x 1073 mol


= 6.00 x mol
Now we need to change the numbers of moles of ammonia in each layer into concentrations (i.e. the
number of moles in 1000 cm? or 1 to substitute into the equilibrium expression for the partition


coefficient,


* concentration of ammonia in 100 of the aqueous layer
1000



= 0.094 mol


* concentration of ammonia in 50 cm? of the organic solvent
1000


= 0.012 mol


The expression for the partition coefficient, Kp¢ is:
solvent)]



0.012


(NO units)


= 6.13



This value is less than 1, which shows us that ammonia is more soluble in water than in the


organic solvent.


 


What affects the value of
The value of Ky, depends on the relative solubilities of the solute in the two solvents used in the
partitioning. Solubility depends on the strength of the intermolecular bonds between the solute and the
solvent. This in turn depends on the polarity of the molecules of solute and solvent. For example, ammonia
is a polar molecule that forms hydrogen bonds with water. So ammonia is very soluble in water. Ammonia
is less soluble in organic solvents such as trichloromethane because the bonding between
ammonia and the solvent is permanent dipole-permanent dipole, which is weaker than hydrogen bonding.


So the partition coefficient:



=
is less than 1 because the concentration of ammonia in is less than the concentration of ammonia in


water.
lodine is a molecular element and will not dissolve very well in water. In order for it to dissolve, iodine-
water bonds need to be formed. This is unlikely because the hydrogen bonding between water molecules is
one of the strongest intermolecular forces. The iodine cannot disrupt the hydrogen bonded structure of
water. lodine dissolves in organic solvents such as cyclohexane. Both are non-polar molecules. lodine forms


instantaneous dipole-induced dipole bonds with cyclohexane.


 


lodine does appear to dissolve in water to a very small extent. This is due to the equilibrium

+ + +
The position of equilibrium is well over to the left. The iodine itself is not soluble but the ions formed



are and so the iodine appears to dissolve very slightly. Note that solutions of iodine in the laboratory


are made up by dissolving iodine in potassium iodide. The ion is formed, which is soluble in water.


 

So iodine is more soluble in organic solvents than in water and the partition coefficient:



=
is greater than 1 because the concentration of iodine in is greater than the concentration of iodine in


water.


In general, for a solute X partitioned between two solvents, A and B, the equilibrium expression is given by:
[X(solvent A)]


[X(solvent B)]
The solute X should be in the same physical state and molecular state in both solvents, e.g. in Worked


example 10, ammonia is present as NH3 in solution.


Partition coefficients and paper chromatography
In paper chromatography, the different partition coefficients of the components in a mixture correspond to
their relative solubilities in the two solvents. In Worked example 10, the relative solubility of ammonia in
water is greater than in the organic solvent. In paper chromatography, the mobile phase is the solvent
chosen. The other solvent is the water trapped in the paper’s structure, which is the stationary phase.
Figure 21.9 shows solute molecules partitioned between the mobile phase and a stationary liquid phase on


a solid support.
solute molecules
dissolved in the stationary


stationary liquid phase liquid phase


 


solid support
Figure 21.9: Partition chromatography. The mobile phase moves over the stationary liquid phase, carrying solute


particles with it. The filter paper is the solid support in paper chromatography.


 
The solutes in the mixture being separated are partitioned to different extents between the solvents in the
mobile and stationary phases. The greater the relative solubility in the mobile phase, the faster the rate of


movement as the mobile phase passes over the stationary phase.


Questions
16 of butanedioic acid (BDA) in ether contains 0.034 mol of BDA in 20 cm? of ether. This
solution is shaken with 50 cm? of water. The mass of BDA extracted into the water layer after shaking


was 0.032 mol.
the concentration of BDA in the water layer after shaking.


b the concentration of BDA in the ether layer after shaking.


the value of the partition coefficient,


 
looking at the coursebook, write down a list of all the mathematical expressions that are
relevant to this chapter. Compare them with those of another learner and then with those given in


the coursebook.
Which expressions did you find difficult to remember. or even forget completely? What will you do


to try to remember them better?
Work with another learner and take it in turns to explain these terms to each other:


solubility product; buffer solution; partition coefficient; conjugate acid.
What problems did you encounter while explaining these terms? How can you overcome these

problems?




SUMMARY


PH is a measure of the hydrogen ion concentration: pH = [H*(aq)]


is the dissociation constant for an acid. It is the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of a weak acid,



=


Acid strengths can be compared using values: =
The ionic product for water, Ky = [OH~(aq)] = 1.00 x mol?


A buffer solution is a mixture of a weak acid and its conjugate base or a weak base and its conjugate acid.
The pH of a buffer solution can be calculated by using the equilibrium concentrations of the weak acid and its


conjugate base and the K, value of the weak acid.
The solubility product, Ksp, is the equilibrium expression showing the equilibrium concentrations of the ions in a


saturated solution of a sparingly soluble salt taking into account the relative number of each ion present.
The addition of a common ion to a saturated solution of a sparingly soluble salt (e.g. adding a concentrated solution


of (sodium) chloride to a saturated solution of silver chloride) causes precipitation of the sparingly soluble salt.
The partition coefficient, Kpc, is the equilibrium constant which relates the concentration of a solute partitioned


between two immiscible solvents at a particular temperature.


[X(solvent A)]


=


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


Write general expressions for the terms:
[1]
ii Ky [1]
K,


b the pH of 0.004 00 mol Show your working. [2]
the pH of 0.004 00 mol butanoic acid(aq).


= 1.51 x mol [3]
d 0.25 mol of sodium hydroxide is dissolved in 2.00 dm? of water.
Calculate the concentration and pH of the sodium hydroxide solution.


(Ky = 1.00 x 10714 mol? [3]


[Total: 11]

IMPORTANT
You have to know how to calculate the pH of three different types of solution:

astrong acid


aweak acid


a buffer.
Each of these requires a different approach. Practise them until you always choose the


correct method for each one.
In Question 1 part d, rearrange the expression for K,, to work out the ion


concentration.


 
2 the pH of a solution containing 0.100 mol ethanoic acid and 0.100 mol
sodium ethanoate?


(K, of CH3COOH = 1.74 x 10-5 mol [3]
b many moles of sodium ethanoate must be added to 2.00 dm? of 0.0100 mol


ethanoic acid to produce a buffer solution of pH 5.40? [5]
why the pH of a solution containing 0.100 mol ethanoic acid and 0.100 mol
sodium ethanoate does not change significantly when a small amount of


hydrochloric acid is added. [3]
[Total: 11]
bromide, CuBr, is a sparingly soluble salt. (K,, = 3.2 x 10-® mol?
Define the terms:
solubility product [2]


ii common ion effect [2]


the solubility of CuBr in:
pure water [2]
an aqueous solution of 0.0100 mol sodium bromide. [1]

Explain the difference in your answers to part b, i and ii. [2]
[Total: 9]



4 A buffer solution consists of 6.00 g of ethanoic acid (CH3COOH) and 12.3 g of sodium


ethanoate in 200 cm? of aqueous solution.

(A, values: H = 1.0, C = 12.0, O = 16.0, Na = 23.0; K, for CH3COOH = 1.74 x 10-5 mol
the concentration of ethanoic acid in the buffer. [2]
the concentration of sodium ethanoate in the buffer. [2]
Calculate the pH of the buffer solution. [2]


this solution as an example, explain why the pH of a buffer solution changes very
little when small amounts of hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions are added to it. [3]


how the carbon dioxide / hydrogencarbonate buffer helps control blood pH. [3]


[Total: 12]
solution of sulfide, contains 1.91 x g of


dissolved in 1 dm? of water. (A, values: Cu = 63.5, S = 32.1)
an equilibrium expression for the solubility product of sulfide. [1]


the value of the solubility product of sulfide, stating the units. [5]
chromate has a solubility of 1.9 x 10-3 mol in water. sulfate
has a solubility of 1.4 x 107! mol in water. What will you observe when 10 cm? of
an aqueous solution of 0.0100 mol sulfate is added to an equal volume


of a saturated solution of chromate. Explain your answer. [3]
[Total: 9]


6 the pH of 0.25 mol HCl(aq). [1]
the pH of 0.0500 mol sodium hydroxide.


(Ky = 1.00 x mol? [2]
dissolved in an organic solvent, hydrogen chloride reacts with hydrogen iodide.


HCl + HI = +


Explain which reactant is the acid and which is the base. [2]
ii Identify which of the products is a conjugate acid and which is the conjugate base


of the substances you identified in part i. [1]
acid is a weak acid. A 0.0500 mol solution of propanoic acid has a pH of


3.1. Calculate the value of K, for propanoic acid. Show all your working. [4]


[Total: 10]


 


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


Ican section... more work there move on


define and use the terms conjugate acid and conjugate base
define mathematically the terms pH, Ka, and Kw and use 21:1,


them in calculations


calculate [H*(aq)] and pH values for strong acids, strong


alkalis and weak acids
describe and explain the uses of buffer solutions, including the


role of in controlling pH in the blood





describe and use the common ion effect to explain the
different solubility of a compound in a solution containing a


common ion
perform calculations using Ksp values and concentration of a


common ion


state what is meant by the term partition coefficient,
calculate and use a partition coefficient for a system in which


the solute is in the same physical state in the two solvents
understand the factors affecting the numerical value of a
partition coefficient in terms of the polarities of the solute and

the solvents used.



images


 


 


 


 


 


 


In this chapter you will learn how to:
e define and explain the terms rate equation, order of reaction, overall order of reaction, rate constant, half-life, rate-


determining step and intermediate


construct and use rate equations of the form rate = k[A]™[B]" for which m and n are 0, 1 or 2
e deduce the order of a reaction from concentration-time graphs or from experimental data relating to the initial rate

method or half-life method
interpret experimental data in graphical form, including concentration-time and rate-concentration graphs

calculate initial rates using concentration data

construct rate equations

demonstrate that the half-life of a first-order reaction is independent of concentration


use the half-life of a first-order reaction in calculations


calculate the numerical value of a rate constant by using initial rates and the rate equation


calculate the numerical value of a rate constant by using the half-life and the equation
0.693




suggest a multistep reaction mechanism that is consistent with the rate equation and the equation for the overall

reaction

predict the order that would result from a given reaction mechanism and rate-determining step
deduce a rate equation given a reaction mechanism and rate-determining step for a given reaction

identify an intermediate or catalyst from a given reaction mechanism


identify the rate-determining step from a rate equation and a given reaction mechanism


e describe catalysts as homogeneous or heterogeneous
describe heterogeneous catalysis in terms of adsorption of reactants, bond weakening and desorption of products
(with reference to iron in the Haber process and palladium, platinum and rhodium in the catalytic removal of oxides


of nitrogen from the exhaust gases of car engines)
describe homogeneous catalysis in terms of being used in one step and reformed in a later step (with reference to
atmospheric oxides of nitrogen in the oxidation of atmospheric sulfur dioxide and Fe2* or in the /


reaction).


Describe qualitatively the effect of temperature on the rate constant and therefore on rate of reaction.


BEFORE YOU START
Work with another learner. Take it in turns to explain to each other the meaning of the terms: rate


of reaction, frequency, effective collisions, non-effective collisions.
Write a paragraph using ideas about colliding particles to explain the effect of increasing the
concentration of a reactant on the rate of reaction and decreasing the temperature on the rate of


reaction. Share your ideas with another learner.
Work with a group of other learners to suggest three different methods of monitoring the rate of a


reaction.
Write a paragraph about how catalysts increase the rate of a chemical reaction. Check your


answers with other learners or with the coursebook.
Sketch a reaction pathway diagram for an endothermic reaction in the presence and absence of a


catalyst. Check your diagram with another learner or with the coursebook.
Explain to another learner how you can find the rate of reaction at any one time from a graph of
volume of gas (y-axis) against time (x-axis). Then ask the other learner to draw and explain the
shape of the graph obtained by plotting the loss in mass of the reaction mixture with time for the


reaction


CaCO3 + > + +


 


STUDYING VERY FAST REACTIONS
Fifty years ago, chemists were becoming excited about monitoring very fast reactions in milliseconds.
The complete course of some very fast reactions can be monitored using stopped-flow
spectrophotometry. In this technique, very small volumes of reactants are driven at high speed into a
mixing chamber. From here they go to an observation cell, where the progress of the reaction is
monitored (usually by measuring the transmission of ultraviolet radiation through the sample). A graph

of rate of reaction against time can be generated automatically.
At the same time, physicists were developing and experimenting with lasers that produce a beam of
radiation of a single wavelength and produce pulses of radiation which last only a few picoseconds (1
picosecond = s) (Figure 22.1). This led to the possibility of studying even faster light-dependent
reactions that involve the formation of free radicals, e.g. the reaction of chlorine with methane in the
presence of light.


 


 


Figure 22.1: Lasers such as this can be used to study how molecules break apart and rearrange themselves.


 
In order to investigate a light-dependent reaction, the laser light is separated into two pulses. We can
use the time delay between the pulses to get information about the reaction. One of the first uses of
this new technology by chemists was to investigate the dissociation of iodine molecules dissolved in a
solution of tetrachloromethane. After the first pulse of light, it takes 50 picoseconds for the iodine
molecules to dissociate (break up) into iodine atoms. The iodine atoms then recombine to form iodine
molecules. The rate of recombination of the iodine atoms into iodine molecules was lower than
predicted. This led the scientists to suggest that a solvent cage of tetrachloromethane around the
iodine was reducing the rate of the reaction. Some iodine atoms were escaping from the solvent cage
but the molecules did not. Carrying out the experiment with higher frequency (higher energy) light
increased this difference. The scientists suggested that more iodine atoms escaped from the solvent


cage because more iodine atoms were formed.


Questions for discussion


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:
e Sketch a graph of the laser experiment to show the change in absorption (y-axis) of the iodine with


time. Assume that the absorption is proportional to the number of iodine atoms in the mixture.


e Suggest why the results of the experiment were controversial at the time.


e To what extent do chemists depend on physicists and mathematicians?


22.1 Factors affecting reaction rate


In Chapter 9 you learned why reaction rate is increased when:


e
the concentrations of the reactants are increased
the temperature is increased


a catalyst is added to the reaction mixture.


In this chapter you will review the definition of the rate of reaction, and find out about:


quantitative aspects of reaction rates
how the data gathered from experiments on rates of reaction can be used to confirm possible reaction

mechanisms
more about how catalysts speed up reaction rates.


22.2 Rate of reaction
Defining rate of reaction
We calculate rate of reaction by measuring a decrease in concentration of a particular reactant or an


increase in concentration of a particular product over a period of time.


change in concentration


rate of reaction = time taken for this change
Units of concentration are usually expressed in mol dm~3, units of time are usually expressed in seconds,
so the units of rate of reaction are normally mol For very slow reactions, you may see the units


of rates expressed as mol or mol
In Chapter 9 we showed how the rate of reaction can be calculated by using tangents to the curve. In this
chapter we will analyse the shape of the curves obtained in greater depth and show how the information
obtained from experiments on rate of reaction can be used to give information consistent with a proposed


reaction mechanism.


22.3 Rate equations


The rate constant and rate equations


The units of rate of reaction are mol

In Chapter 9 we studied the rate of isomerisation of cyclopropane to propene.



|



cyclopropane propene
The progress of this reaction can be followed by measuring the decrease in concentration of cyclopropane
or increase in concentration of propene. Table 22.1 shows the change of cyclopropane concentration at 500
°C. The measurements were all made at the same temperature because reaction rate is affected markedly


by temperature.


Table 22.1: Rates of conversion of cyclopropane to propene at different concentrations of cyclopropane.


 


 
A graph of rate of reaction against concentration of cyclopropane (Figure 22.2) shows us that the rate is
directly proportional to the concentration of cyclopropane. So, if the concentration of cyclopropane is
doubled, the rate of reaction is doubled. If the concentration of cyclopropane falls by one-third, the rate of


reaction falls by one-third.
=


 


Rate of decrease of / mol
0 10


[cyclopropane] / mol


Figure 22.2: The rate of decrease of cyclopropane. Note how the gradient is constant.


concentration


 
The third column in Table 22.1 shows that the rate of the reaction is proportional to cyclopropane
concentration (within the limits of experimental error). This is shown by the fact that the rate divided by


concentration is constant.

We can express this mathematically as:
rate of reaction = k x [cyclopropane]


The proportionality constant, k, is called the rate constant.
The overall expression (rate of reaction = k x [cyclopropane]) is the rate equation for this particular


reaction. Rate equations are generally written without the x sign.
For example:


rate = k[cyclopropane]
Rate equations can only be determined from experimental data. They cannot be found from the


stoichiometric equation.


Some experimentally determined rate equations are shown in Table 22.2.



NO(g) + CO(g) + O2(g) NOz(g) +
2H2(g) + 2NO(g) + rate = k[H2] [NO]?


+ + H*(aq) > 3Br2(aq) + rate = k[BrO3~]


 


Table 22.2: Rate equations for some reactions.


 
You can see from reaction 1 that the rate of reaction is proportional to the concentration of both and
however, in reaction 2, CO and do not appear in the rate equation, even though they are present in the
stoichiometric equation. Similarly in reactions 3 and 4 there is no relationship between the rate equation


and the stoichiometry of the chemical equation.
In order to find the rate equation, we have to conduct a series of experiments. Using reaction 3 from Table


22.2 as an example:
First, find how the concentration of affects the rate by varying the concentration of while


keeping the concentration of NO(g) constant.


The results show that the rate is proportional to the concentration of hydrogen (rate =
Then find how the concentration of NO(g) affects the rate by varying the concentration of NO(g) while


keeping the concentration of constant.
The results show that the rate is proportional to the square of the concentration of NO (rate =
Combining the two rate equations we get the overall rate equation:
rate = [NO]?
The rate equations for some reactions may include compounds that are not present in the chemical
equation.
Question
rate equations for each of the following reactions:
propene
where rate is proportional to the concentration of cyclopropane
b 2HI(g) > H2(g) +
where rate is proportional to the square of the hydrogen iodide concentration
+


where rate is proportional to the concentration of and to the concentration of H* ions


+ >


+ + 2CO2(g)


 


 


where rate is proportional to the concentration of and to the square of the concentration of



+ Ip + HI
where rate is proportional to the concentration of CH3COCH3 and to the concentration of H* ions,


but the concentration of |, has no effect on the rate.


Order of reaction


The order of a reaction shows how the concentration of a reactant affects the rate of reaction.
The order of reaction with respect to a particular reactant is the power to which the concentration of that


reactant is raised in the rate equation.
For example, for a rate equation involving only one particular reactant, the order is the power of the
concentration shown in the rate equation. For reaction 2 in Table 22.2, the rate equation is rate = k[NO]?


and so the order is 2 with respect to [NO].
When you are writing about order of reaction, you must distinguish carefully between the order with
respect to a particular reactant and the overall order of reaction. Taking reaction 3 in Table 22.2 as an


example:
rate = [NO]?


We say that this reaction is:


first order with respect to (as rate is proportional to

second order with respect to NO (as rate is proportional to [NO]?)

e third order overall (as the sum of the powers is 1 + 2 = 3).
In general terms, for a reaction A + B > products, the rate equation can be written in the form:


rate of reaction =


In this equation:
e [A] and [B] are the concentrations of the reactants
mand nare the orders of the reaction


the values of m be 0, 1, 2, 3 or rarely higher
when the value of m or nis 0 we can ignore the concentration term because any number to the power


of zero
Orders of reaction are not always whole numbers. A few reactions have fractional orders. For example, the


reaction:
CH3CHO(g) > + CO(g)
has an overall order of 1.5. The rate equation for this reaction is:


rate =


Many reactions involving free radicals have fractional orders of reaction.


IMPORTANT
When discussing order of reaction, make sure that you state what the order refers to, e.g. first order


with respect to hydrogen; second order overall.


 
Question

For each of the reactions a to e in Question 1, state:
i the order of reaction with respect to each reactant


overall order of reaction.


Units of k


The units of k vary according to the form of the rate equation.


IMPORTANT


Remember that the units of rate are usually mol but the units of the rate constant must be


worked out from the rate equation in the form
mol


units for the product of the concentration terms


 

 


Question
3 the units of k corresponding to each of the following rate equations:
=
b = k[NH3]°


=


= k[cyclopropane]


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
State the units of k for the following equation:


+ > 2HI(g)
Step 1: Write the rate equation.


rate =


Step 2: Rearrange the equation in terms of k.



 
Step 3: Substitute the units.
_ mol
(mol (mol
Step mol


(mol x
Step 5: Units of k.
units of k = dm3 =
¢ when writing the units on one line, the indices on the bottom change sign


we usually put the unit with the positive index first


don’t forget the arising from the units of rate.


the units of k for the following equation: + 2NO(g) +
Step 1: Write the rate equation.


rate =


Step 2: Rearrange the equation in terms of k.
rate


Step 3: Substitute the units.


= mol


(mol


Step Cancel mol


mo!



x (mol


Step of k.

dm®



22.4 Which order of reaction?


We can identify the order of a reaction in three ways:
plot a graph of reaction rate against concentration of reactant


plot a graph of concentration of reactant against time


deduce successive half-lives from graphs of concentration against time.


Graphs of reaction rate against concentration
A graph of reaction rate against concentration tells us whether a reaction is zero, first, second or third


order with respect to a particular reactant (or overall). It is very rare to obtain an order with respect to a
particular reactant higher than second order. Figure 22.3 shows the shapes of the graphs expected for


different orders of reaction.
second order


rate of reaction =
   
   
 
   


  


  
zero order


rate of reaction = k
 


   
first order


rate of reaction =


Reaction rate / mol


Concentration of reactant, [R] / mol
Figure 22.3: Zero-, first- and second-order reactions: how changes in the concentration of a reactant affect the reaction


rate.


 

We shall now look at some examples of zero-, first- and second-order reactions.

Zero-order reaction
2NH3(g) +

The rate equation derived from experiments is:
rate = k[NH3]°
The plot of reaction rate against concentration is a horizontal straight line (see Figure 22.3). The reaction
rate does not change with concentration. For a zero-order reaction, k is numerically equal to the reaction


rate:


This is because any number to the power of zero = 1.
First-order reaction


£4. +


The rate equation derived from experiments is:
rate =
This is usually written as:
rate =
The plot of reaction rate against concentration is an inclined straight line going through the origin (see
Figure 22.3). The rate is directly proportional to the concentration of So doubling the concentration of
N20 doubles the rate of reaction.
Second-order reaction
NO2(g) + CO(g) > NO(g) + CO2(g)
The rate equation derived from experiments is:
rate =


The plot of reaction rate against concentration is an upwardly curved line (see Figure 22.3).
In this case, reaction rate is directly proportional to the square of the concentration of When the
concentration of doubles, the rate of reaction increases four-fold. If we consider the second-order
rate equation as written above, we can see that this is true by comparing the rates at two different


concentrations, 1 mol and 2 mol


rate at 1 mol = k(1)? = 1k


rate at 2 mol = k(2)? = 4k


Question
4 Draw sketch graphs of reaction rate against concentration of the reactant in bold for each of the


following reactions:
+ CO(g) + +
for which the rate equation is: rate = k[NO]?
+


for which the rate equation is: rate = k
Note: the catalyst influences the order here: the order is not the same as for the uncatalysed


reaction.


€ + > (CH3)3COH +


for which the rate equation is:


Graphs of concentration of reactant against time
Figure 22.4 shows how we can distinguish between zero-, first- and second-order reactions by plotting a

graph of concentration against time.
For a zero-order reaction, the graph is a descending straight line. The rate of reaction is the slope
(gradient) of the graph. The reaction proceeds at the same rate whatever the concentration of the
reactant.



zero order: constant rate of decline
first order: declines in a shallow curve


second order: a deeper curve
   
 
 
 
 


   


zero order


first order


second order


Concentration of reactant, [R]


 



Time/s
Figure 22.4: Zero-, first- and second-order reactions: how changes in the concentration of a reactant affect the time


taken for a reaction to proceed.


 
For first- and second-order reactions, the graph is a curve. The curve for the second-order reaction is much
deeper than for a first-order reaction. It also appears to have a relatively longer ‘tail’ as it levels off. We can


also distinguish between these two curves by determining successive half-lives of the reaction.


Question
For each of the reactions a to c in Question 4, draw a sketch graph to show how the concentration of


the bold reactant changes with time.


Half-life and reaction rates
Half-life, is the time taken for the concentration of a limiting reactant to fall to half of its initial



value.
Figure 22.5 shows how half-life is measured for the cyclopropane to propene reaction that we studied
earlier. Three successive half-lives are shown. Table 22.3 shows the values of the successive half-lives


obtained from Figure 22.5.


4.00 to 2.00 17.0


 
2.00 to 1.00 17.0 =17.3


1.00 to 0.50 51.0 - 34.3 = 16.7


Table 22.3: A constant half-life indicates a first-order reaction.


 




 


   




[cyclopropane] / mol



=


 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70


Time/min


Figure 22.5: Measurement of half-life for cyclopropane isomerisation.


 
You can see that the successive half-lives have values that are fairly close to each other (17.0, 17.3, 16.7).
The mean half-life is 17.0 minutes for this reaction. We can tell that this reaction is first order because the
successive half-lives are more or less constant. In a first-order reaction like this, the half-life is independent
of the original concentration of reactant. This means that whatever the starting concentration of


cyclopropane, the half-life will always be 17 minutes.


We can distinguish zero-, first- and second-order reactions from their successive half-lives (Figure 22.6).
 
  


    


——


 

\ first order \ second order


8



ty (2) ty (2) (1) (2)
2 2 2 2


Time Time Time
Figure 22.6: The half-life of zero-, first- and second-order reactions can be determined from graphs of concentration


against time.


 
reaction has successive half-lives which decrease with time.


e A first-order reaction has a half-life which is constant.
Second-order reactions have successive half-lives which increase with time. (This also applies to


reactions with a higher order for a particular reactant but we will not be discussing these.)


IMPORTANT


 


For the half-life method, you will only be expected to do calculations for first-order reactions.


Question


chloride, decomposes at room temperature:
+ >

+ +
how this reaction can be monitored.


b the data in the table, plot a graph of concentration of against time.


 


c your graph, find the value of two successive half-lives.


the values of these half-lives to deduce the order of the reaction.


22.5 Calculations involving the rate constant, k


Calculating k from initial concentrations and initial rate
In the presence of hydrogen ions, hydrogen peroxide, reacts with iodide ions to form water and


iodine:
+ + 2H*(aq) > +
The rate equation for this reaction is:


rate of reaction = [I7]
The progress of the reaction can be followed by measuring the initial rate of formation of iodine. Table 22.4


shows the rates of reaction obtained using various initial concentrations of each reactant.


0.0300 0.0100 0.0100 5.30 x


Table 22.4: Rates of reaction obtained using different initial concentrations of ions and H* ions.


 


 
The procedure for calculating k is shown below, using the data for experiment 1.
Step 1: Write out the rate equation.


rate of reaction = [I7]


Step 2: Rearrange the equation in terms of k


= rate



Step 3: Substitute the values


 


3.50 x 10-8
(0.0200) x (0.0100)


k x 1072 dm?
Note: the concentration of hydrogen ions is ignored because [H*] does not appear in the rate equation. The


reaction is zero order with respect to [H*].
Calculating k from half-life


For a first-order reaction, half-life is related to the rate constant by the expression:


= where is the half-life, measured in s.


2
We can rewrite this in the form:
— 0.693



So, for the first-order reaction cyclopropane to propene, for which the half-life is 17.0 min, we:
convert minutes to seconds


then substitute the half-life into the expression:


t= 0.693
k= 0.693 0.693


t 17.0 x 60


 


 
1

2
6.79 x



This value is very close to the ones quoted in Table 22.1. Rate constants for zero- and second-order


reactions can also be calculated from half-lives but the calculations are more complex.


We can also use the expression k = to calculate the half-life of a first-order reaction if we know the
2


rate constant.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
3 reacts with hydrochloric acid at 25 °C. The products are chloromethane and water.


+ HCl(aq) +
Equimolar amounts of methanol and hydrochloric acid are mixed at 25 °C. The progress of the


reaction is followed by:


taking a small sample of the reaction mixture from time to time, then
titrating each sample with a standard solution of sodium hydroxide.


The data obtained are shown in Table 22.5.


Time / min [HCI] / mol [CH30H] / mol


1.84 1.84


200 1.45 1.45
800 0.91 0.91


1000 0.81 0.81


1200 0.72


1600


1800


2000


 


1400


Table 22.5: Data for the reaction between methanol and hydrochloric acid.


 


Step 1: graph of concentration (of hydrochloric acid) against time (Figure 22.7).


Step 2: Draw tangents to the curve at various places corresponding to a range of concentrations.


In Figure 22.7 the tangent drawn corresponds to [HCI] = 1.04 mol
  
  


      


 


 

 
1.80
1.60 + tangent to the curve at 600 min
1.40 reaction fate at 600 min
2 1.480 mol dm
= x
1.20 s 1.23 x
~
1.00 +

£ 0804

0.604



O 0.40 |
acs
0.20
0.0 + T T 1
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000


Time/min


Figure 22.7: The concentration of both hydrochloric acid and methanol fall at the same rate as time passes.


 
Step 3: For each tangent drawn, calculate the gradient and then the rate of reaction. In Figure
22.7, the rate corresponding to [HCI] = 1.04 mol is = 1.23 x mol


(multiply by 60 to convert minutes to seconds)
Table 22.6 shows the rates corresponding to five different concentrations of hydrochloric


acid.
Time / Concentration / mol dm | Rate from graph / mol Rate from graph / mol


min -3
1.84 1073 3.83 x 10-5


200 1.45 1.46 x 10-3 2.43 x 10-5
1.22 1.05 x 1.75 x 10-5
1.04 0.74 x 10-3 1.23 x 10-5


800 0.91 0.54 x 1073 0.90 x 10-5


Table 22.6: Values calculated for the reaction between methanol and hydrochloric acid.


 


 
w




Rate of




 


 


 
T T
0 1.0 2.0


[HCl] and dm-3
Figure 22.8: A graph showing how changes of concentration in hydrochloric acid or methanol affect the rate of


reaction. The curve shows that the reaction is likely to be second order.


 


Step 4: Plot a graph of rate of reaction against concentration.
Figure 22.8 shows a plot of rate against the concentration of [HCI] or [CH30H]. We have
included the [CH30H] because if you look at the data in Table 22.5, you will see that the
concentration of is decreasing at the same rate as the decrease in concentration


of HCl.
Figure 22.8 shows an upward curve. This indicates that the reaction is second order. But second order
with respect to what? As the concentrations of both HCI and are decreasing at the same rate,


either of these may be second order. The possibilities are:
rate = k[CH30H] [HCI]
rate =


rate =
Further experiments would have to be carried out to confirm one or other of these possibilities. The

only thing we can be sure of is that the reaction is second order overall.



Question
7 Use the data from experiments 2 and 3 in Table 22.4 to calculate the rate constant for the


following reaction.
+ + 2H*(aq) >


+


The rate equation for this reaction is:


rate of reaction = [I7]
the formula t: = to calculate a value for the rate constant of a reaction which is first


order and has a half-life of 480
first-order reaction has a rate constant of 9.63 x 10-5 Calculate a value for the half-life of


this reaction.


The effect of temperature on the rate constant
In Chapter 9, when studying the Boltzmann distribution curve, we learned that at higher temperatures a
greater proportion of the molecules have energy greater than the activation energy. So the rate of reaction
increases at higher temperatures. The rate constant, k, and therefore the rate of reaction, is proportional to
the fraction of molecules with energy equal to or greater than the activation energy. So the rate constant


increases as the temperature increases.
Figure 22.9a shows the effect of increasing temperature on rate of reaction. For every 10 °C rise in
temperature, the rate of reaction approximately doubles. The exact relationship between temperature and

the rate constant is given by the equation:



where:

In k is the natural logarithm of the rate constant
A is a constant related to the frequency of collisions and the orientation in which the molecules collide


E, is the activation energy


R is the gas constant


T is the temperature in kelvin
You do not have to learn this equation but it is useful for an understanding of how temperature affects the


rate constant.
A varies very little with temperature so can be thought of as being constant. E, and R are also constants.

So a graph of In k against ; should give a straight line of gradient (Figure 22.9b).

a b

- 5





£





E









2






3



20 30 40 50 2.9 x 10 3.2 x 10


temperature / °C

Figure 22.9: The effect of increasing temperature on a rate of reaction b rate constant.



22.6 Deducing order of reaction from raw data
We can use any of the methods mentioned in Section 22.3 to determine the order of a reaction. In this


section we shall look in detail at some more complex examples.


Using data from the course of a reaction
For this method, we carry out one or more experiments with known initial concentrations of reactants and


follow the course of the reaction until it is complete (or nearly complete).
The steps in analysing the data are as follows.


Step 1: Plot a graph to show how the concentration of a particular reactant (or product) changes with time.
Step 2: Take tangents at various points along the curve which correspond to particular concentrations of


the reactant.
Step 3: Calculate the slope (gradient) at each concentration selected. The rate of reaction is calculated


from the slope of the graph.


Step 4: Plot a graph of rate of reaction against concentration.
Using initial rates


The initial rates method is often used when the rate of reaction is slow.


Carry out several experiments with different known initial concentrations of each reactant.


Measure the initial rates of reaction by either:
taking the tangent of the curve at the start of each experiment, or


measuring the concentration of a reactant or product soon after the experiment has started.


For each reactant, plot a graph of initial rate against concentration of that particular reactant.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
4 Nitrogen(V) oxide, decomposes to nitrogen(IV) oxide and oxygen.


2N205(g) 4NO2(g) + O2(g)


Table 22.7 shows how the initial rate of reaction varies with the initial concentration of


Initial concentration, / mol Initial rate / 10-5 mol


 


Table 22.7: Data for the decomposition of nitrogen(V) oxide.


 
A graph of the data (Figure 22.10) shows that the initial rate of reaction is directly proportional to the


initial concentration of


rate of =
   
    

     

3.00





E




£ 2.004 te


rate
rate=k



1.00 +


 
1.00 2.00 3.00


Initial concentration,


Figure 22.10: The initial rate of decomposition of nitrogen(V) oxide is directly proportional to the initial concentration.


 


 


Question
8 Suggest how the experiment for the reaction between methanol and hydrochloric acid might be re-
designed to obtain evidence for the effect of changing the HCI concentration while controlling the


CH30H concentration.


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
5 The equation below describes the reaction of propanone with iodine. Hydrogen ions catalyse this


reaction.


+ + HI
The progress of the reaction can be followed by using a colorimeter. The brown colour of the iodine


fades as the reaction proceeds (Figure 22.11). The experimental results are shown in Table 22.8.


 
Figure 22.11: The rate of reaction between propanone and iodine can be followed by the loss of colour of the


reaction mixture as the reaction proceeds.
[HCI] / mol [propanone] / 10-3 mol | [iodine] / 10-3 mol 10-6 mol


Experiment | dm-3 dm-3


 


 
Table 22.8: Experimental results for the reaction of propanone with iodine at varying aqueous concentrations.

Note that:




the data is from real experiments, so experimental errors have to be taken into account


the hydrogen ions have been provided by the hydrochloric acid.
In this method, we see how changing the concentration of each reactant in turn affects the rate of
reaction. In order to make a fair comparison, we must make sure that the concentrations of the other

reactants are kept constant.

Compare experiments 1 and 2 (propanone and iodine concentrations are constant):
¢ doubling the concentration of ions from 0.625 to 1.25 mol doubles the rate of reaction


¢ the reaction is first order with respect to Ht ions.


Compare experiments 1 and 3 (hydrochloric acid and iodine concentrations are constant):
doubling the concentration of propanone from 0.25 x 1073 to 0.50 x 10-3 mol doubles the


rate of reaction
the reaction is first order with respect to propanone.


Compare experiments 1 and 4 (hydrochloric acid and propanone concentrations are constant):
doubling the concentration of iodine from 0.625 x to 1.25 x 1073 mol has no effect on


the rate of reaction.


the reaction is zero order with respect to iodine.


 


Questions


9 State the order of reaction for the decomposition of nitrogen(V) oxide.
b the data for 3.00 mol in Table 22.7 to calculate a value for the rate constant for


this decomposition.


10 a_ Write the rate equation for the acid-catalysed reaction of iodine with propanone.
b your rate equation and the information in Table 22.8 (experiment 1) to calculate a value for


the rate constant for this reaction.


22.7 Kinetics and reaction mechanisms
The rate-determining step
In Worked example 5 you saw that for the reaction:
+ + HI
the iodine did not appear in the rate equation but the H* ions did.
Areactant that appears in the chemical equation may have no effect on reaction rate.


that is not a reactant in the chemical equation can affect reaction rate.
In organic chemistry, you have met the idea that reactions occur in a number of steps. We call this the
reaction mechanism. These steps do not take place at the same rate. The overall rate of reaction depends
on the slowest step. We call this the rate-determining step. If the concentration of a reactant appears in
the rate equation, then that reactant (or substances that react together to form it) appears in the rate-


determining step. If a substance does not appear in the overall rate equation it does not take part in the
rate-determining step. So, for the reaction between propanone and iodine, H* ions are involved in the rate-


determining step but iodine is not.


Verifying possible reaction mechanisms
We can use kinetic data to confirm proposed reaction mechanisms. It is important to realise that the
mechanism is not deduced from the kinetic data. The kinetic data simply show us that a proposed reaction


mechanism is possible.
Various mechanisms have been proposed for the reaction


CH3COCH3 + + HI


Figure 22.12 shows one proposed mechanism.
*OH
I fast ll


+ ==


 
*OH OH
ll slow |
+ Ht
OH *OH


fast
| I


CH;—C= CH, + ——» +


*OH fe)
fast


+ F + HI
Figure 22.12: Propanone molecules rapidly accept hydrogen ions to form an intermediate that slowly forms propen-2-ol.


This reacts rapidly with iodine to give the products.


 
The rate equation for this reaction is


rate = [H*]
We could not have deduced this reaction mechanism from the rate equation. But the mechanism is

consistent with the rate equation.
The slow step (the rate-determining step) does not involve either propanone or hydrogen ions directly.
However, the intermediate with the formula



‘oH


CH,—C—CH,
is derived from substances that react together to form it (propanone and hydrogen ions). So both


[CH3COCH3] and [H*] appear in the rate equation.
The reaction between iodine and the intermediate is fast and iodine molecules are not
involved in the mechanism until after the rate-determining step. So the rate of reaction does not depend


on the concentration of iodine.
In Section 22.6 we saw that the rate equation for the reaction


2N205(g) 4NO2(g) + O2
is rate = Figure 22.13 shows a suggested mechanism for this reaction. The rate equation suggests
that a single molecule is involved in the rate-determining step. This fits in with the proposed
mechanism that suggests that the decomposition of to form and is the slow step. The steps


that follow the slow step are relatively fast and so have no effect on reaction rate.

+ Oe


QO
in the first step each molecule breaks down,


they don’t collide in pairs


 


slow
Reaction steps: @ NO, + NO, (note that two molecules of need to have
fast reacted for subsequent steps to be completed)
@ No, +
fast


@ No —, 2no,
Figure 22.13: The rate equation tells us that the decomposition of individual molecules of nitrogen(V) oxide is the rate-
determining step. The subsequent reactions are very much faster by comparison, and do not influence the overall rate. Try


to match the reaction steps with the illustrations to get a picture of what is happening.


 
If there is only a single species (atom, ion or molecule) in the rate-determining step we call the reaction
unimolecular. two species (which can be the same or different) are involved in the rate-determining step,
we Say that the reaction is bimolecular. Mechanisms that involve a trimolecular step are rare. This is


because it is unlikely that three species will collide at the same time.
Question
An acidified solution of hydrogen peroxide reacts with iodide ions.
+ 2H*(aq) + > +
The rate equation for this reaction is
rate = [I7]


The mechanism that follows has been proposed for this reaction.


+ +
H+ + HIO


HIO + H* + 1, +


Explain why this mechanism is consistent with the rate equation.


IMPORTANT
Remember that the overall stoichiometry of a chemical equation does not tell us anything about the
reaction mechanism. A suggested mechanism should be consistent with the rate equation not the


stoichiometric equation.


 


Predicting the order of a reaction from reaction mechanisms
We can predict the order of reaction from a given reaction mechanism if we know the intermediates
present in the rate-determining step (or substances that react together to form the intermediate). Take, for


example, the reaction of propanone with bromine in alkaline solution.
CH3COCH3 + + >


+ + Br-


The reaction mechanism is shown in Figure 22.14.


H H



OH-
|


H H H H


H O H H O H
| |


Br + Br-
| | |


H H H H


Figure 22.14: The reaction mechanism for the bromination of propanone in alkaline conditions.


 
The rate-determining step in this reaction is the slow step. The slow step involves one molecule of
propanone and one hydroxide ion, so only these two species appear in the rate equation. The reaction is


second order overall, first order with respect to propanone and first order with respect to hydroxide ions.


rate =


Bromine does not appear in the rate equation, as it takes part in a fast step after the rate-determining step.


Question


12 The reaction 2NO(g) + 2NOCI(g) is carried out in a sealed tube.


At the start of the experiment, the concentration of both NO and was 0.01 mol


The reaction is second order with respect to NO and first order with respect to

Which one of these represents the rate of reaction when the concentration of NO falls to 0.005 mol dm
-39
kx (0.005)? x (0.0025)
x (0.005) x (0.0075)


C x (0.0075)

x (0.005)? x (0.0075)



REFLECTION
Write a list of the different methods of determining the order of a reaction. For each method, give
details of exactly how you do the calculations. Compare your list with that of another learner. What


processes did you go through to produce these details?
Which of these topic areas did you find most challenging: constructing a rate equation; calculating
rate of reaction or rate constants; answering questions about reaction mechanisms?


What strategies are needed in order to improve your understanding of this topic area?


 


22.8 Catalysis
In Chapter 9 you saw that catalysts increase the rate of a chemical reaction. They do this by providing an
alternative pathway for the reaction with lower activation energy. Many transition element compounds are


catalysts (Figure 22.15).


We can divide catalysts into two main classes.
¢ Homogeneous catalysis occurs when the catalyst is in the same phase as the reaction mixture. For


example: hydrogen ions catalyse the hydrolysis of esters.
+


CH3COOH(aq) +


In this reaction the reactants, products and catalyst are all in the aqueous phase.


 
Figure 22.15: Addition polymers are produced using metallocene catalysts such as ZrCH3]*. The strength and


puncture resistance of this polymer film have made it popular for food packaging.


 
Heterogeneous catalysis occurs when the catalyst is in a different phase to the reaction mixture.


For example, the decomposition of aqueous hydrogen peroxide is catalysed by manganese(IV) oxide.


+


The manganese(IV) oxide is in the solid phase, whereas the hydrogen peroxide is in aqueous solution.


Homogeneous catalysis
Homogeneous catalysis often involves changes in oxidation number of the ions involved in catalysis. For
example, small amounts of iodide ions catalyse the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. In the catalysed
reaction, iodide ions, are first oxidised to ions, |O~. The ions then react with further

molecules of hydrogen peroxide and are reduced back to iodide ions.

+ +
+ + + O2(g)


The overall equation is:


+

lons of transition elements are often good catalysts because of their ability to change oxidation number.
Examples of homogeneous catalysis


IMPORTANT


 

Most examples of homogeneous catalysis involve redox reactions.

The iodine-peroxodisulfate reaction
Peroxodisulfate (persulfate) ions, oxidise iodide ions to iodine. This reaction is very slow.

+ > +

The peroxodisulfate and iodide ions both have a negative charge. In order to collide and react, these ions


need considerable energy to overcome the repulsive forces when like charges approach each other.


(aq) ions catalyse this reaction. The catalysis involves two redox reactions.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 22.1
SAFETY: Only carry out this activity in the presence of a teacher after safety aspects have been


explained.
Examples of catalysts
1 Homogeneous catalysis
Put 10 cm? of 0.5 mol sodium potassium tartrate in a 250 cm? beaker.
Add 10 cm? 2.0 mol hydrogen peroxide and stir.
Warm the beaker carefully and note any signs of a reaction.
Stop heating then add 1 cm? of 0.1 mol cobalt chloride.


Describe the result.


2 Heterogeneous catalysis


each of 6 test-tubes add 2 cm? 2.0 mol hydrogen peroxide.
b very small portions (end of a spatula) of each of the following to separate test-tubes.
i
ii Cu,0
iii MgO



Describe the results and suggest the common features of the oxides with catalytic power.


 
e Reaction 1: reduction of Fe3+ ions to Fe2* ions by ions:
+ 2Fe?*(aq) +


Reaction 2: oxidation of ions back to by ions:


+ > +
In both reactions 1 and 2, positively charged iron ions react with negatively charged ions. As ions with
unlike charges are attracted to each other, these reactions are more likely to occur than direct reaction


between and ions.
You should notice that it doesn’t matter what the order is of the two reactions. The oxidation of ions to


by ions could happen first:
+ > +
followed by
+ > +


This reaction is catalysed by Fe?*(aq) and it is also catalysed by
Figure 22.16 shows an energy level profile for the catalysed and the uncatalysed reactions. Note that the
catalysed reaction has two energy ‘humps’ because it is


a two-stage reaction.
uncatalysed


reaction
  
      


  
catalysed


reaction


Enthalpy change
+



reaction 1



+


 


 


Progress of reaction


Figure 22.16: Energy level profiles for the catalysed and uncatalysed reactions of peroxodisulfate ions with iodide ions.


 
In order for this catalysis to work, the standard electrode potentials for the reactions involving the catalyst


must lie between the electrode potentials involving the two reactants (Figure 22.17).
E°/V
+
+0.77| ------------ Fe3+ + Fe2+


+0.54| ------------ Ip +


Figure 22.17: The electrode potential diagram for the catalysis of the reaction + > + lo.


 
The use of electrode potentials in this way only predicts that the catalysis is possible. It does not give any


information about the rate of reaction.


Oxides of nitrogen and acid rain
Sulfur dioxide is produced when we burn fossil fuels containing sulfur. When sulfur dioxide escapes into the
atmosphere, it contributes to acid rain. One of the steps in the formation of acid rain is the oxidation of


sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide.


+
This oxidation is catalysed by a wide variety of mechanisms. Nitrogen(IV) oxide present in the atmosphere
from a variety of sources (see Section 13.3) can catalyse the oxidation of sulfur dioxide. The

oxide is re-formed by reaction with atmospheric oxygen.
$02(g) + NO2(g) > SO3(g) + NO(g)


NO + NO2(g)
Questions
State which pairs of substances i to iv below might catalyse the reaction:


+ +

Explain your answer.


/ Ni(s)
ii / Mn2*(aq)
/


Cu?*(aq) / Cu*(aq)
in terms of oxidation number change, which species are being oxidised and which are


being reduced in these equations:


+ SO3(g) + NO(g)


ii


Heterogeneous catalysis
Heterogeneous catalysis often involves gaseous molecules reacting at the surface of a solid catalyst. The
mechanism of this catalysis can be explained using the theory of adsorption. Chemical adsorption (also
called chemisorption) occurs when molecules become bonded to atoms on the surface of a solid. Transition
elements such as nickel are particularly good at chemisorbing hydrogen gas. Figure 22.18 shows the


process of adsorption of hydrogen onto a nickel surface.
weaken


bonds



atoms on ———>


nickel surface
chemisorbed


hydrogen atoms


Figure 22.18: The adsorption of hydrogen onto a nickel surface.


 
You must be careful to distinguish between the words adsorb and absorb. Adsorb means to bond to the
surface of a substance. Absorb means to move right into the substance: rather like a sponge absorbs


water.


The stages in adsorption of hydrogen onto nickel are:


hydrogen gas diffuses to the surface of the nickel
the hydrogen is physically adsorbed onto the surface: weak forces link the hydrogen molecules to the


nickel
the hydrogen becomes chemically adsorbed onto the surface: this causes stronger bonds to form


between the hydrogen and the nickel


this causes weakening of the hydrogen-hydrogen covalent bond.
When a reaction on the catalyst surface is complete, the bonds between the products and the catalyst


weaken so much that the products break away from the surface. This is called desorption.


Examples of heterogeneous catalysis


in the Haber process
Particular conditions of temperature and pressure are required to form ammonia from nitrogen and
hydrogen (see Section 13.2). The reaction is catalysed by iron. The catalyst works by allowing hydrogen
and nitrogen molecules to come close together on the surface of the iron. They are then more likely to


react. Figure 22.19 shows the five steps in this heterogeneous catalysis.


 


 


 
“Sy
@) diffusion to
the surface
surface of
the iron
H HN N
@ adsorption
new bonds forming
H
reaction
(in several
steps) H
|

@ desorption
H
|

©) diffusion
away from


surface


Figure 22.19: A possible mechanism for catalysis in the Haber process.


 


Diffusion: nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas diffuse to the surface of the iron.
2 Adsorption: the reactant molecules are chemically adsorbed onto the surface of the iron. The bonds


formed between the reactant molecules and the iron are:
strong enough to weaken the covalent bonds within the nitrogen and hydrogen molecules so the


atoms can react with each other


weak enough to break and allow the products to leave the surface.
3 Reaction: the adsorbed nitrogen and hydrogen atoms react on the surface of the iron to form


ammonia.
4 Desorption: the bonds between the ammonia and the surface of the iron weaken and are eventually


broken.


5 Diffusion: ammonia diffuses away from the surface of the iron.


IMPORTANT


For the mechanism of heterogeneous catalysis remember the order:


adsorption — old bonds breaking and

new bonds forming desorption



Transition elements in catalytic converters
Catalytic converters are fitted to car exhausts to reduce the amount of harmful nitrogen oxides escaping
into the atmosphere. Once warmed up, the catalyst speeds up the conversion of nitrogen oxides to
harmless nitrogen gas and the conversion of poisonous carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. Unburned
hydrocarbons from car engines may also reduce the nitrogen oxides in a catalytic reaction. Simplified


equations for the overall reaction are:
2NO(g) + CO(g) > +
and


+ 4CO(g) > +
The ‘honeycomb’ structure inside the catalytic converter contains small beads coated with platinum,
palladium or rhodium. These act as heterogeneous catalysts. Possible steps in the catalytic process


include:
* adsorption of nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide onto the catalyst surface


weakening of the covalent bonds within the nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide


formation of new bonds between


adjacent nitrogen atoms (to form nitrogen molecules)


carbon monoxide and oxygen atoms to form carbon dioxide


desorption of nitrogen molecules and carbon dioxide molecules from the surface of the catalyst.
Question
14 Describe in general terms what is meant by desorption.
Nickel acts as a catalyst for the hydrogenation of alkenes. For example:


+ CH3-CH3
Suggest how nickel catalyses this reaction by referring to the processes of adsorption, reaction on


the metal surface and desorption.
converters, rhodium catalyses the reduction of oxide, NO, to nitrogen.


Draw diagrams to suggest:


i how NO is adsorbed onto the surface of the rhodium metal


ii how nitrogen is formed.


REFLECTION
Work with another learner. Choose one aspect of catalysis, e.g. how homogeneous catalysts work


or a specific catalytic reaction. Without looking at a textbook, work together to write a paragraph


about this aspect of catalysis.
Was there anything that the other learner suggested that you could learn from? Did you have any


ideas that they could learn from as well?


 

SUMMARY

The general form of the rate equation is: rate = where:

kis the rate constant


[A] and [B] are the concentrations of those reactants that affect the rate of reaction


mis the order of the reaction with respect to A and n is the order of reaction with respect to B.


The order of reaction can be determined from graphs of reaction rate against concentration.
The half-life of a first-order reaction may be used in calculations to find the first-order rate constant using the
relationship:


z
The rate-determining step is the slowest step in a reaction mechanism. The rate-determining step determines the


overall rate of reaction.
The order of reaction with respect to a particular reactant shows how many molecules of that reactant are involved


in the rate-determining step of a reaction.
The order of a reaction can be predicted from a given reaction mechanism knowing the rate-limiting step.
Homogeneous catalysis occurs when a catalyst and the reactants are in the same phase.


Heterogeneous catalysis occurs when a catalyst is in a different phase from the reactants.

The mechanism of heterogeneous catalysis involves the processes of adsorption, reaction and desorption.



 


 
The rate of reaction between butanone and iodine is studied. In this experiment, iodine is in excess.
The concentration of butanone is measured at various time intervals. The results are shown in the


table below.


Plot these data on a suitable graph. [3]


 
b Demonstrate that this data is consistent with the reaction being first order with respect


to butanone. [2]


the gradient of your graph when the butanone concentration is:
mol [1]
ii 0.040 mol [1]


0.010 mol [1]
your answers to part c to plot a suitable graph to show rate of reaction (on the


vertical axis) against concentration (on the horizontal axis). [3]
e how the graph you plotted in part d is consistent with the reaction being first


order with respect to butanone. [2]


[Total: 13]


IMPORTANT
Questions 1 a, 4 b and 6 a all require you to plot a graph. Make sure that you do the


following:
the axes (e.g. 0-120 minutes and 0-0.080 mol take up more than half of the graph


paper you use
label the axes sensibly so that plotting is easy; for example, if on your time axis, one large


square = 10 minutes, you are less likely to make plotting mistakes
plot points precisely with a sharp pencil


draw a smooth curve through the points, with care.


These skills are all essential and should be practised every time you plot a graph.


 
The reaction



is zero order with respect to one reactant, first order with respect to another reactant and second


order with respect to another reactant.
aii Explain what is meant by the term order of reaction with respect to a given


reactant. [2]
ii Use the data in the table below to deduce the order with respect to each of the


reactants, A, B and C.



 


1.00 0.100 1.00 0.00008
0.00031


0.00073
0.200 0.00158


0.300 0.00236 [9]


 
b Write the rate equation for this reaction. [1]


ii State the overall order of the reaction. [1]
Calculate the value of the rate constant using experiment 6. Include the units in


your answer. [3]
Suggest a possible mechanism consistent with the rate equation you have proposed and


the chemical equation
[3]


[Total: 19]
The rate equation for the reaction between iodine and propanone is:


rate = k[CH3COCHs] [H*]


 


 
State the order of reaction with respect to iodine. [1]
the overall order of reaction. [1]
c Define the term half-life. [1]
ii experiment, a large excess of iodine is reacted with a small concentration of
propanone in the presence of H*(aq). The concentration of propanone is measured
at regular time intervals. Explain what happens to the value of the half-life of the
propanone concentration as the concentration of propanone decreases. [1]
the sketch graph. Plot additional points at 10-second intervals up to 50 s. Join all
the points with a smooth curve. [4]
8x





~
44 x

6

o
Qa


0+ 1
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Time/s


e the term rate-determining step. [2]
f Suggest a possible mechanism for the rate-determining step for the reaction between

iodine and propanone. [3]
[Total: 13]



4 The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, to oxygen and water is catalysed by


manganese(IV) oxide.


Define the term catalyst. [2]


results for the decomposition of a sample of hydrogen peroxide are shown in the


table.


 



[H202] / mol dm-3 1.04
i Draw a graph of concentration of hydrogen peroxide (vertical axis) against time


(horizontal axis).
Draw a curve of best fit. [3]
ii Use your graph to determine the half-life of the reaction. Show your working. [2]
Use your graph to find the rate of reaction after 2 min. [4]


i Give the rate equation for the reaction. Explain your answer. [3]
ii Use your answer to part b iii to calculate the value of the rate constant, k, and give


the units. [3]
Using your rate equation, find the rate of reaction when = 2 mol [2]


[Total: 19]
Peroxodisulfate ions, react with iodide ions in aqueous solution to form iodine


and sulfate ions.


+ + equation 1
The initial rates of reaction are compared by timing how long it takes to produce a particular
amount of iodine using four different initial concentrations of The results are shown in the


table.
Initial rate of reaction /


4.16 x 10-3
3.12 x 10-3


2.50 x 10-3


 


1.70 x
Plot a suitable graph to calculate rate of reaction. [3]


Deduce the order of reaction with respect to peroxodisulfate ions. Explain your answer. [2]
The reaction is first order with respect to iodide ions. Use this information and your


answer to part b to write the overall rate equation for the reaction. [1]
The reaction between peroxodisulfate ions and iodide ions is slow. The reaction can be
speeded up by adding a few drops of ions. The following reactions then take


place:
+ > + equation 2
+ > + equation 3


i Identify the type of catalysis occurring here. Explain your answer. [2]
ii By referring to equations 1, 2 and 3 above, suggest why Fe?*(aq) ions catalyse the


reaction between peroxodisulfate ions and iodide ions. [4]


[Total: 12]


The rate of reaction between butanone and iodine is studied. In this experiment,
butanone is in excess. The concentration of iodine is measured every 10 minutes for 1 hour. The


results are shown in the table.


 


Plot these data on a suitable graph. [3]
Show from the graph that these data are consistent with the reaction being zero order

with respect to iodine. [1]


The balanced chemical equation for the reaction is
+ + HI
Suggest whether or not this reaction could occur in a single step. Explain your answer. [2]


The rate equation for the reaction is rate =
Explain the different meanings of the balanced chemical equation and the rate equation. [4]


[Total: 10]
7 Nitrogen oxides can be removed from the exhaust gases of a car engine by using a
catalytic converter. Many catalytic converters contain metals such as platinum and rhodium. These


act as heterogeneous catalysts.
i State what is meant by the term heterogeneous catalysis. [2]

ii Explain in general terms how heterogeneous catalysts work. [4]
Nitrogen(IV) oxide and carbon monoxide from car exhausts can react in a catalytic

converter.
+ CO(g) > NO(g) +
The rate equation for this reaction is rate = k[NO>]*
Suggest a two-step reaction mechanism for this reaction that is consistent with this rate
equation. [2]


Nitrogen(IV) oxide is formed when oxide reacts with oxygen.


2NO(g) + O2(g) > 2NO2(g)
The table shows the data obtained from a series of experiments to investigate the


kinetics of this reaction.


[NO] / mol [02] / mol Initial rate / mol


 


i Deduce the order of reaction with respect to each reactant. In each case, show your
reasoning. [4]
ii the rate equation for this reaction. [1]


State the units of the rate constant, k, for this reaction. [1]


[Total: 14]
ions react with bromide ions in acidic solution to form bromine.


+ + 6H*(aq) > +


b
Suggest two methods of following the progress of this reaction. For each method explain

your answer. [4]
The initial rates of reaction were compared using the initial concentrations of reactants


shown in the table.


 


i Deduce the order of reaction with respect to each reactant. In each case, show your
reasoning.


ii the rate equation for this reaction.


iii State the units of the rate constant, k, for this reaction.
[6]
[1]


[1]


Describe and explain in terms of the Boltzmann distribution curve and collisions between


particles, the effect of temperature on the rate constant of this reaction.


SELF-EVALUATION
Almost


there
define and explain the terms rate equation, order of reaction,
overall order of reaction, rate constant, half-life, rate-


determining step and intermediate
deduce the order of a reaction from concentration-time graphs
or from experimental data relating to the initial rate method or


half-life method


use the use the of reaction in life of use the of reaction in first-order reaction in calculations |


[4]


[Total: 16]
Ready to


move on
calculate the numerical value of a rate constant by using


initial rates and the rate equation
calculate the numerical value of a rate constant by using the
half-life and the equation k =



suggest a multistep reaction mechanism that is consistent
with the rate equation and the equation for the overall


reaction


describe catalysts as homogeneous or describe catalysts as homogeneous or as homogeneous or heterogeneous
describe heterogeneous catalysis in terms of adsorption of
reactants, bond weakening and desorption of products (with
reference to iron in the Haber process and palladium, platinum
and rhodium in the catalytic removal of oxides of nitrogen


from the exhaust gases of car engines)
describe homogeneous catalysis in terms of being used in one
step and reformed in a later step (with reference to
atmospheric oxides of nitrogen in the oxidation of atmospheric


sulfur dioxide and Fe2+ or Fe3+ in the / reaction).
Describe qualitatively the effect of temperature on the rate |

constant and therefore on rate of reaction.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


 


EFORE YOU START
Work with another learner. Take it in turns to explain to each other the meaning of the chemical


terms: surroundings, system, feasible, bond rotation, bond stretching.


2 Explain Hess’s law to another learner.
3 Write a paragraph explaining why it is important to take the state (solid, liquid or gas) into account
when you are carrying out calculations involving enthalpy changes. Share your ideas with the rest


of the class.
4 Ask another learner to select an example of a chemical reaction involving at least one compound
as a reactant. Explain to the other learner exactly how to calculate the enthalpy change of this
reaction (remember to take note of the stoichiometry of the reaction). Then reverse the process:


you choose the reaction and the other learner explains.


Explain to another learner how to calculate the standard cell potential, for the cell reaction:


+ > +


WHY DO RUBBER BANDS HAVE ELASTIC PROPERTIES?


 
Entropy can be thought of as a measure of randomness or disorder. The second law of
thermodynamics states that the total entropy increases in all processes that take place by themselves


(spontaneous changes). In other words, reactions go in the direction of more disorder.
Some rubbery polymers show an amazing elastic behaviour. Natural rubber is a polymer that can be
stretched up to six times its original length. But it still returns to its original length when the pulling


force is removed.
A polymer chain with freely rotating bonds, i.e. single bonds, can be coiled into thousands of different
shapes all having similar energy. The natural shape of the chain (random unstretched coils) has the


highest entropy. The most unlikely shape is a perfectly ordered straight chain.
For stretching to take place, the molecules must have some freedom to move and the polymer must
have weak intermolecular forces between the chains. When we stretch an elastic band, we straighten
out the chain by applying a force. This can be easily done with a very small force since it only involves


rotation of the bonds rather than stretching the bonds (Figure 23.1).
So why does the elastic go back to a random coil when the stretching force is removed? It is because
entropy rather than energy is the important factor in a spontaneous change. The stretched form has
lower entropy because the polymer chains are more ordered (less random). So when the stretching
force is removed, the rubber goes back to the form with greater entropy (more randomness).
Remember from the second law of thermodynamics that processes go in the direction of more


disorder!


 
Figure 23.1: In diagram a the polymer chains are stretched and have low entropy. In diagram b the polymer chains

are unstretched and have high entropy.




Qestion for discussion


Read the following paragraph about rubber production.
Natural rubber is produced from the latex (white sap) of various types of tree. The latex is removed by
making a slit in the trunk and collecting the latex. The latex is then coagulated with the help of
methanoic acid and sodium metabisulfite. Ammonia and sodium sulfite are often added as
preservatives. Phosphates are sometimes added as well. Sulfuric acid used in the process of ‘curing’
the rubber can also be reduced to hydrogen sulfide gas. The rubber sheets are dried near where the
rubber is produced, either in the air or often using a ‘smokehouse’ where wood or another fuel is


burned to help dry the sheets. The rubber is then washed with plenty of water.


Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e What environmental problems can arise during the production of rubber?


 


23.1 Introducing entropy
Entropy is a measure of the dispersal of energy at a specific temperature. Entropy can also be thought of
as a measure of the randomness or disorder of a system. The higher the randomness or disorder, the
greater the entropy of the system. A system is the part under investigation. In chemistry, this is the


chemical reaction itself, i.e. reactants being converted to products.
The system of magnesium reacting with sulfuric acid in a test-tube to form magnesium sulfate and


hydrogen releases energy to the surroundings.

The surroundings include:

the solvent (in this case water)

e the air around the test-tube


the test-tube itself


anything dipping into the test-tube (e.g. a thermometer).
Changes that tend to continue to happen naturally are called spontaneous changes. Once started, a
spontaneous change will carry on. When a spark is applied, methane gas reacts with oxygen ina
spontaneous reaction to form carbon dioxide and water. The reaction is spontaneous because the methane
continues to burn in the oxygen until either the methane or oxygen is completely used up. For a reaction to
be spontaneous, it does not need to happen rapidly. Many spontaneous reactions are slow or need an input

of energy to start them.
Entropy can also be thought of as a dispersal of energy, either from the system to the surroundings or from
the surroundings to the system. The system becomes energetically more stable when it becomes more
disordered.


23.2 Chance and spontaneous change


Diffusion
If you spill a few drops of perfume in a closed room with no air draughts, the smell spreads gradually
throughout the room. The molecules in the perfume vapour, which are responsible for the smell, move
randomly in straight lines until they collide with air molecules, other perfume molecules or with the walls of
the room. After collision, the perfume molecules change direction. This process of random movement and
random collisions of molecules is called diffusion. The reason molecules in a vapour diffuse is because of


the laws of chance and probability.
We can make a model to show how, during a spontaneous process, the entropy of the system increases.
Figure 23.2 shows a system of two flasks connected by a stopcock. One flask contains helium and the other


contains argon. These gases do not react.


 


    
after mixing
He atom


increase in entropy


Figure 23.2: The spontaneous mixing of helium atoms (*) with argon atoms


 
When the stopcock is opened, the gas atoms move spontaneously by diffusion. After mixing, the gases are


mixed up and there is more disorder than before mixing. The entropy has increased.


Diffusion and number of ways
We can show that the molecules in a vapour diffuse by chance. We do this by thinking about the probability


of finding them at one place at any one time. Consider the simplified model shown below.


partition


 


®


 
gas jar B
The three molecules in gas jar A cannot move into gas jar B.
In this model we assume:


there are only a few molecules in gas jar A
there are no other particles present
the molecules move randomly and change directions when they collide.


After we remove the partition, the molecules can move randomly not only within gas jar A but also into gas
jar B. There are three molecules and two places in which they can be (gas jar A and gas jar B). The possible


ways of arranging the molecules after removing the partition are shown in Figure 23.3.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

 




®



Figure 23.3: The eight possible arrangements of molecules after removing the partition between the gas jars.


 
There are eight different ways of arranging the three molecules between two gas jars. We can express this


as:


number of molecules


two gas jars
Each of these ways is equally likely (equally probable). So the chance that all the molecules will stay in gas
jar Ais 1 in 8. Similarly, the chance that all three molecules will move over to gas jar B is 1 in 8. The
molecules diffuse because there are more ways of them being spread out than remaining in the same


place.
If we started with five molecules in gas jar A, the number of different ways of arranging the molecules is 25
= 32. If we scaled this up to the numbers of gas molecules that we might find in a container in the
laboratory, the number of ways of arranging the molecules is extremely large. For example, for a million
molecules between two gas jars, it would be 2? 990, number that is too large for your calculator to deal
with. Diffusion happens because there is an strong likelihood of it taking place as a result of the large
number of ways of arranging the molecules. The idea of the ‘number of ways’ of arranging either molecules
or the energy within molecules affects whether the changes that take place are the ones that are most


likely to happen. This applies to chemical reactions as well as to physical processes such as diffusion.


IMPORTANT


Entropy is greater if:


there are more ways of arranging the energy in a molecule or atom


there are more ways of arranging the molecules or atoms in a given volume.


 


Question
1 Forthis question, refer back to Figure 23.3. If there are four molecules in the gas jar on the left,

how many ways of arranging the molecules are there when the partition is removed?


b is the probability of finding all four molecules in the right-hand gas jar?
of the following changes are likely to be spontaneous?
i sugar dissolving in water
ii smell from an open bottle of aqueous ammonia diffusing throughout a room

water turning to ice at 10 °C
vaporising at 20 °C


mixing completely with cooking oil


(calcium carbonate) decomposing at room temperature.

Comparing entropy values

To make any comparison of entropy values fair, we must use standard conditions. These standard

conditions are the same as those used for AH:

of 10° Pa


atemperature of 298 K (25 °C)
each substance involved in the reaction is in its normal physical state (solid, liquid or gas) at 105 Pa


and 298 K.
Under these conditions, and for a mole of substance, the unit of standard molar entropy, S®, is
Standard molar entropy is the entropy of one mole of substance in its standard state. The symbol 6


indicates that the entropy is at standard conditions.


Table 23.1 shows some values for some standard molar entropies.
diamond(s)


graphite(s)


calcium(s)
calcium oxide(s)


calcium carbonate(s)
Table 23.1: Standard molar entropy values of some solids, liquids and gases. The states are shown as state symbols after


each substance.


 


 
The values of all standard molar entropies are positive. Remember that elements have positive standard
molar entropy values. Do not mix entropies up with enthalpies: the elements in their standard states have


enthalpy values of zero.
The entropy values are compared to a theoretically perfect crystal. The third law of thermodynamics states
that ‘All perfect crystals have the same entropy at a temperature of absolute zero’. The nearest we can get


to this is a perfect diamond weighing 12 g cooled to as low a temperature as possible.


From the values in the table and other data we can make some generalisations:
Gases generally have much higher entropy values than liquids, and liquids have higher entropy values
than solids (see Figure 23.4). There are exceptions to this. For example, calcium carbonate (solid) has a


higher entropy value than mercury (liquid).
Simpler substances with fewer atoms have lower entropy values than more complex substances with a
greater number of atoms. For example, for calcium oxide, CaO, = 39.7 J but for calcium
carbonate, CaCO3, = 92.9 J Carbon monoxide, CO, has a lower entropy value than


carbon dioxide,
For similar types of substances, harder substances have a lower entropy value. For example, diamond


has a lower entropy value than graphite and calcium has a lower entropy value than lead.
For substance, the entropy increases as a solid melts and then changes to a vapour (see Figure
23.5). For example, the molar entropy of ice just below its melting point is 48.0 The molar
entropy for water is 69.9 J but just above its boiling point, the value increases to 188.7 K~+
There is a gradual increase in entropy as the temperature of a substance is increased.
Increasing the temperature of a solid makes the molecules, atoms or ions vibrate more. Increasing the
temperature of a liquid or gas increases the entropy because it increases the disorder of the particles.
When a substance melts or vaporises, there is a large increase in entropy because there is a very large


increase in the disorder of the particles.


  
Figure 23.4: a A diamond has a very low entropy value because it is a solid element with atoms regularly arranged. b


Bromine has a high entropy value because it tends to spread out.


 
    


  


boiling point


Entropy / J mol"


   


melting point


 


 


Temperature / K


Figure 23.5: The change in entropy as a substance melts and then boils.


 


When a solid changes to a liquid
The regularly arranged lattice of particles close together in the solid changes to an irregular arrangement


of particles, which are close together but rotate and slide over each other in the liquid.

When a liquid changes to a vapour
The irregular arrangement of particles in the liquid which are close together and rotating changes to an
irregular arrangement of particles which are free to move around rapidly because they are far apart from
each other.


IMPORTANT


Note that when a gas condenses to a liquid or a liquid changes to a solid, the entropy decreases
because the particles are going from a more disordered state to a more ordered state. There are also


fewer ways of arranging the energy in a solid.


 
When a solid dissolves in a solvent, the entropy generally increases. In the solid, the particles are ordered
and can only vibrate. The entropy is low. When dissolved in a solvent to form a dilute solution, the particles
are spread out from each other and can move randomly from place to place. The entropy is high because
not only are the particles spread out more but also the number of ways of arranging the energy is greater.
So, there is generally an increase in entropy on dissolving. Conversely, when a salt crystallises from a
solution, the entropy decreases because some of the random mobile particles in the solution are becoming


ordered particles in the crystal.


IMPORTANT
Care must be taken when discussing the entropy change of solution. For concentrated aqueous
solutions of salts which have highly charged ions, there may be a considerable order in the solvent due


to several hydration layers around these ions.


 


Question
2 the difference in the entropy of each of the following pairs of substances in terms of their state


and structure.
= 151.6 J and = 116.8 J
(S@ = 130.6 J and = 186.2 J


= 76.00 J and Na(s) = 51.20 J


d = 248.1 J and SO3(I) = 95.60 J


Entropy changes in reactions
In a chemical reaction, if we compare the entropies of the reactants and products, we can try to explain the
magnitude of the entropy change and whether or not it increases or decreases. We will assume that gases
have high entropy and solids have low entropy. If there is a change in the number of gaseous molecules in
a reaction, there is likely to be a significant entropy change. This is because high values of entropy are
associated with gases. The more gas molecules, there are, the greater the number of ways of arranging


them and the higher the entropy. For example, in the reaction:


CaCO3(s) CaO(s) +
there is an increase in entropy of the system because a gas is being produced (high entropy) but the


reactant, calcium carbonate, is a solid (low entropy).


In the reaction > + O2(g)
we should expect an increase of entropy of the system because there is a greater number of moles of gas
molecules in the products (5 molecules) than in the reactants (2 molecules). In addition, there are two
different product molecules but only one type of reactant molecule. This also contributes to a greater
disorder in the products compared with the reactants. The system becomes energetically more stable when


it becomes more disordered.
In the reaction + 3H2(g) 2NH3(g)


we should expect a decrease in the entropy of the system because there is a reduction in the number of
gas molecules as the reaction proceeds. So the entropy change of the system is negative. The reactants,


hydrogen and nitrogen, are more stable than the product, ammonia.


Question
3 each of the following reactions, suggest whether the entropy of the reactants or the products will
be greater or whether it is difficult to decide.
Explain your answers.
+
b S(s) +
+ 2MgO(s) + C(s)
+ >
+ C(s) > H2(g) + CO(g)
f > H2(g) +

+ 2KOH(aq) + H2(g)
> MgO(s) +


23.3 Calculating entropy changes


Entropy changes in exothermic and endothermic reactions
Energy can be transferred from the system to the surroundings (exothermic change) or from the
surroundings to the system (endothermic change). The surroundings are so large that when energy


exchange takes place there is such a small change in temperature or pressure that we can ignore this.
For an exothermic reaction, the energy released to the surroundings increases the number of ways of
arranging the energy. This is because the energy goes into rotation and translation (movement from
place to place) of molecules in the surroundings. So there is likely to be an increase in entropy and an
increased probability of the chemical change occurring spontaneously. In other words, the reaction


becomes more feasible.
e For an endothermic reaction, the energy absorbed from the surroundings decreases the number of
ways of arranging the energy. So there is likely to be a decrease in entropy and a decreased probability


of the chemical change occurring spontaneously.


Total entropy change


IMPORTANT


You do not have to know the equation


= + ASE,


system surroundings


for your examination, but this section is useful for a general understanding of entropy.


 
We can use entropy values to predict whether a chemical reaction will occur spontaneously or not. When a
chemical reaction takes place there is a change in entropy because the reactants and products have
different entropy values. The symbol for standard entropy change is AS®. The total entropy change


involves both the system and the surroundings. For the system (reactants and products), we write the


entropy change as For the surroundings we write the entropy change as
The total entropy change is given by:


= +
If the total entropy change increases, the entropy change is positive, e.g. is +40 J The


reaction will then occur spontaneously. We say that the reaction is feasible.
If the total entropy change decreases, the entropy change is negative, e.g. is J The


reaction is then not likely to occur.
Calculating the entropy change of the system


In order to calculate the entropy change of a system, we use the relationship:
= =|


=
The symbol ‘2’ means ‘the sum of’. So, to calculate we add the entropy values of the products and
the entropy values of the reactants separately, then take away the sum of the reactants from the sum of


the products.
Note:


1 We need to take account of the stoichiometry of the equation (as we did in calculations involving AH®).
2 When looking up entropy values in tables of data, we need to choose the data for the correct state,


solid, liquid or gas.


WORKED EXAMPLES
the entropy change of the system for the reaction:


2Ca(s) + O2(g) 2CaO(s)

Solution
The standard entropy values are:
S® [Ca(s)] = 41.40 J
S® = 205.0 J
S® [CaO(s)] = 39.70 J
= =
x — {2 x [Ca(s)] +

x 39.70 — {(2 x 41.40) + 205.0}


= 79.40 — 287.8


=
The negative value for the entropy change shows that the entropy of the system has decreased. We
know, however, that calcium reacts spontaneously with oxygen. So the entropy of the surroundings
must also play a part because the total entropy change must be positive for the reaction to be


feasible.
2 Calculate the entropy change of the system for the reaction:
+ 202(g) +
Solution
The standard entropy values are:
= 186.2 J mol
S® [02(g)] = 205.0 J
S® = 213.6 J
S® = 188.7 J
ASS =
= + 2 x — + 2 x
= {213.6 + (2 x 188.7)} — {186.2 + (2 x 205.0)}


= 591.0 — 596.2


|
The negative value for the entropy change shows that the entropy of the system has decreased
slightly. We know, however, that methane burns in oxygen once it is ignited. So the entropy of the


surroundings must also play a part in the overall entropy change.


 


Question
Calculate the standard entropy change of the system in each of the following reactions using the


standard molar entropy values given here.
(Values for in J = 165.0,
Fe(s) = 27.30, Fe,03(s) = 87.40, = 130.6,
= 69.90, = 109.6, Mg(s) = 32.70,


MgO(s) = 26.90, Na(s) = 51.20, NaCl(s) = 72.10,
NH,NO3(s) = 151.1, = = 205.0
+

> +
+ > 2MgO(s)


d +


+ Fe203(s) 3MgO(s) + 2Fe(s)


Calculating the entropy change of the surroundings


IMPORTANT

You do not have to know the equation AS® = for your examination but the equation is


surroundings


useful for a general understanding of entropy.


 
Many chemical reactions are accompanied by large enthalpy changes. These enthalpy changes change the
number of ways of arranging the energy in the surroundings. So, in many chemical reactions, the value of


the entropy changes in the surroundings cannot be ignored.


The entropy change of the surroundings is calculated using the relationship:

—


surroundings T


where


is the standard enthalpy change of the reaction
Tis the temperature in kelvin. At standard temperature, this value is 298 K.


Note:


1 When performing calculations to find the value of in should be multiplied by


1000. This is because entropy changes are measured in units of joules per kelvin per mole.


2 The negative sign in front of is part of the equation and not the sign of the enthalpy change. If


the enthalpy change is negative, the whole term becomes positive.


      


WORKED EXAMPLES
Note: These examples are extension questions but they give you useful practice in converting kj to J


for which is necessary later on in this


reaction’


Calculate the entropy change of the surroundings for the reaction:
2Ca(s) + O2(g) 2CaO(s)


= kj


Solution
Step 1: Convert the enthalpy change into J by multiplying by 1000.


x 1000 = —1 270


Step 2: Apply the relationship.

T


200)
298


+4262.4
4 Calculate the entropy change of the surroundings for the reaction:
CH,(g) + CO2(g) +


= kj


Solution
Step 1: the enthalpy change into J by multiplying by 1000.


—890.3 x 1000 = —890 300J


Step 2: Apply the relationship.




300)
298


+2987.6.J mol


 


Question
5 the entropy change of the surroundings in each of the following reactions. Assume that the


value of AH does not change with temperature.


+


reaction
= —393.5 carried out at 0 °C
+ > = +307.9 carried out at 300 °C


c H,(g) + 2HF(g) = —271.1 carried out at standard temperature


reaction


+ >


reaction


= +34.30 carried out at —3 °C


Calculating total entropy change
Note: This section about total entropy change is extension material. You will not be examined on it but it


does give you a useful insight into how the surroundings are important in driving the direction of a


reaction.


 
The total entropy change is given by:
= ASS + ASS


We can also write this as:


total T
The total entropy changes for the examples given above for the reactions of calcium with oxygen and the
combustion of methane are calculated by simply adding the entropy change of the system to the entropy


change of the surroundings.
You can see that in both Worked examples 5 and 6, the large positive entropy change of the surroundings
more than compensates for the negative entropy change of the system. The total entropy change is


positive and the reactions are feasible.


WORKED EXAMPLES


 
Calculate the total entropy change for the reaction:
2Ca(s) + 2CaO(s)
tem
= J


Solution


= + ASS,


surroundings


= —208.4 + 4262.4


= +4054.0 J

total
6 Calculate the total entropy change for the reaction:


+ 202(g) +
= —5-2 J
= +2987-6 J


Solution
=
= + 2987.6


= +2982.4


 


Question
6 Calculate the total standard entropy change in each of the following reactions using the standard


molar entropy values given here.
Values for S® in J C(graphite) = 5.700,
= 242.1, C3Hg(g) = 269.9, = 213.6,
H2(g) = 130.6, = 69.90, H2S(g) = 205.7,
= 191.6, O2(g) = 205.0, P(s) = 41.10,


= 228.9, S(s) = 31.80
+ >


reaction


= kJ
b +


= +307.9


reaction
+ 503(g) >


reaction


= kj
d + +


= —2219.2 kj


reaction


Entropy in equilibrium reactions
In equilibrium reactions, both products and reactants are present. How can the total entropy change be
positive in both directions? There is an additional increase in disorder and so an increase in entropy


associated with this mixing.
Figure 23.6 shows how the increase in entropy changes as a reaction progresses, starting either from pure
reactants or pure products to reach equilibrium. As mixing proceeds, the rate of increasing disorder
decreases as more and more molecules are formed from At some stage in the reaction, the rate
of the forward reaction equals the rate of the backward reaction. Equilibrium has been reached. The same


argument applies to the reverse reaction.
 


   


equilibrium


Increase in entropy


 


 


Pure Pure NO»
Figure 23.6: The total entropy change, when is converted to an equilibrium mixture of and N20, and


is converted to the same equilibrium mixture.


 
At the position of equilibrium, the total entropy change of the forward reaction equals the total entropy


change of the backward reaction, and under standard conditions the overall entropy change is zero.


Entropy and temperature


IMPORTANT


You do not have to know the equation


surroundings T


for your examination but this section has relevance for work later on in the chapter.


 


The entropy change of the surroundings is given by

—


surroundings
If we carry out reactions at temperatures above standard temperature, an increase in temperature makes
the entropy change of the surroundings less negative or more positive. If we carry out reactions at
temperatures below standard temperature, a decrease in temperature makes the entropy change of the
surroundings more negative or less positive. In both these cases we make the assumption that
does not change significantly with temperature. In reality, does change slightly with temperature,


but we can often disregard this change.
We can see how increasing the temperature affects the ability of zinc carbonate to undergo thermal
decomposition by comparing the entropy changes at 298 K and 550 K. However, we have to take into
account both the surroundings and the system. We assume that neither the standard molar entropies nor


the enthalpy change of formation changes with temperature.
ZnCO3(s) ZnO(s) + COz(g)


reaction


= +72.3


For this reaction = +174.8 (the same for both temperatures).


system


Reaction at 298 K
As®


surroundings 298


 
=


Se

total
= +174.8 242.6)
= —67.8 J


Reaction at 550 K
— 300


550


=


 
= +174.8 131.5)


= +43.3)
You can see that at 298 K the total entropy change is negative, so the reaction does not occur at this
temperature. At 550 K the total entropy change is positive, so the reaction is spontaneous at this


temperature.
e When the total entropy change in a reaction shows a large increase, e.g. +200 J the


reaction can be regarded as going to completion. It is definitely spontaneous.
e When the total entropy change shows a large decrease, e.g. J we can deduce that


there is very little likelihood of a reaction occurring.


Question
7 decomposition of calcium carbonate
CaCO3(s) CaO(s) +


does not take place at room temperature.
Explain in terms of entropy changes why heating the calcium carbonate to a high temperature


increases the likelihood of this reaction taking place.


system at high temperature, the reactants and products are in equilibrium.
CaCO3(s) = CaO(s) +


i Explain the meaning of the term closed system.
ii Explain, in terms of entropy changes, what happens when the pressure on this system is


increased.


What is the value of the standard total entropy change at equilibrium?
23.4 Entropy, enthalpy changes and Gibbs free


energy


For an exothermic reaction such as:
CHa(g) + 202(g) +


=


reaction
the entropy change of the system is negative. But the large negative value of the enthalpy change more


than compensates for the negative entropy change of the system. This is because it causes the term


to have a high positive value. So the total energy change is positive and the reaction, once
started, is spontaneous. In highly exothermic reactions, where the value of is large and negative,


the enthalpy change is the driving force of the reaction.

In endothermic reactions, the entropy term tends to be more important. The term has a negative


value. If the value of ANd both negative, then the reaction will not be spontaneous.


However, if the value of ASS. is positive and large enough, it can compensate for the negative value of



the that becomes positive. The reaction is spontaneous.
Chemists are usually interested in the system of reactants and products rather than having to consider the
energy changes with the surroundings. Fortunately for us, there is a way in which we can take account of
both system and surroundings in a more straightforward way. This involves a quantity called Gibbs free


energy or, more simply, free energy. It can also be called Gibbs energy or Gibbs function, G (Figure 23.7).


 
Figure 23.7: Gibbs free energy is named after American scientist Josiah Willard Gibbs, who applied the concept of entropy


and ‘applied energy’ changes to chemical reactions and physical processes.


 


IMPORTANT
When selecting entropy and free energy values from tables of data, make sure that you look carefully

at the state symbols.




23.5 Gibbs free energy


What is Gibbs free energy?
In determining whether a chemical reaction is likely to be spontaneous, we use the quantity Gibbs free


energy change, AG. The Gibbs free energy change is given by the relationship:


AG =
We can also write the expression without having to consider the entropy changes of the surroundings. This


expression is called the Gibbs equation.


AG® =


reaction
— TAS$ stem
where T is the temperature in kelvin.


Gibbs free energy is a useful concept because it includes both enthalpy change and entropy change.
To make any comparison of Gibbs free energy values fair, we must use standard conditions. These standard


conditions are the same as those used for AH and AS:
pressure of 105 Pa


temperature of 298 K (25 °C)
each substance involved in the reaction is in its normal physical state (solid, liquid or gas) at 10° Pa


and 298 K.
The standard molar Gibbs free energy of formation is the free energy change that accompanies the


formation of one mole of a compound from its elements in their standard state.
The symbol for standard molar Gibbs free energy of formation is AGS. The units are kJ


For example:


Mg(s) + MgO(s) AGP = —569.4


Derivation
Gibbs free energy can easily be derived from the equation relating total entropy to the entropy changes of


system and surroundings.


As:


= ASS,



system


Multiplying by —T: — = +


The term — TASS.


system


So = and so = AH® —


+ AH® is equivalent to the Gibbs free energy change of the reaction system AG®.


Gibbs free energy and spontaneous reactions


IMPORTANT
The words spontaneous and feasible both have meanings of ‘likely to happen’. We use the word
feasible for chemical reactions. The word spontaneous is a more general term and applies to physical


processes such as diffusion and dissolving as well.


 
For a reaction to be feasible (spontaneous), must be positive. The value of T is always positive on the
absolute (kelvin) temperature scale. So applying these signs to the relationship = — the value of
AG must be negative for a reaction to be spontaneous. So, when a feasible (spontaneous) reaction occurs


at constant temperature and pressure, the value of the Gibbs free energy is negative. If the value of AG is


positive, the reaction is not feasible.


Applying the equation = AH® —


IMPORTANT


In calculations involving the equation


AG® = AH® — TASS.


system
don’t forget to multiply the value of by 1000 if AH® is in kJ. This is because the units of AS® are in


joules per kelvin per mole.


 


We can calculate the Gibbs free energy change for a reaction if we know:


the entropy change of the system
the enthalpy change of the system in J we may have to multiply the value of the enthalpy


change by 1000 to convert from kJ


the temperature: under standard conditions, this is 298 K.


WORKED EXAMPLE


7 Calculate the Gibbs free energy change for the decomposition of zinc carbonate at 298 K.
ZnCO3(s) ZnO(s) + COz(g)


= +71.0 kj
Values for in J
= +213.6, ZnCO3(s) = +82.4, ZnO(s) = +43.6


Solution
Step the value of AH®.


AH® = 71.0 x 1000 = 71 000 J
Step 2: Calculate
ASS =
= + —


= 43.6 + 213.6 — 82.4


= +174.8 ] mol
Step 3: Calculate AG®.


AG® =


reaction

= 71 000 — 298 x (+174.8)


AG® = +18 909.6 J


+18.9 (to 3 significant figures)


As the value of AG® is positive, the reaction is not spontaneous at 298 K.


 


Question
8 the standard Gibbs free energy of reaction in each of the following, using the standard molar
entropy values given. Express your answers to 3 significant figures in and in each case state

whether or not the reaction is spontaneous under standard conditions.
Values for in J = 167.4,



= 121.3, = 165,
= 213.6, = 130.6, HCl(g) = 186.8,
= 69.9, = 37.2, = 89.6,


Na(s) = 51.2, = 95.0, = 205.0
+ Cl2(g)


=
+ +


=
+


=
d +


=
e +


= +167.5 kj


9 Methanol reacts with hydrogen bromide.
+ HBr(g) > CH3Br(g) +


AH® = —46
Which one of these values is the correct value of AG for this reaction at 25 °C?


Standard molar entropy values (in J are:
= 239.7, HBr(g) = 98.6,


CH3Br(g) = 246.3, = 69.9


 

kj



kj


Temperature change and reaction spontaneity
For a reaction to be spontaneous, AG must be negative. The temperature can influence the spontaneity of
a reaction. We can deduce this by considering the Gibbs free energy as a combination of two terms in the


relationship:
AG =



first term second term
Assuming that the value of does not change much with temperature, we can see that the value of


May influence the value of AG.


For an exothermic reaction, the first term has a negative value.
e If the value of is positive, the second term is negative and the reaction will be


spontaneous because both ANd are negative. So AG is negative.
If the value of AS.y<tem is negative, the second term is positive to overcome the negative value of
Make AG positive. So the reaction is less likely to be spontaneous at a higher
temperature. This mirrors what we know about the effect of temperature on equilibrium: for an
exothermic reaction, a higher temperature shifts the position of the equilibrium in favour of the
reactants. The reaction is likely to be spontaneous if the temperature is low because is more
likely to have a greater negative value than the positive value of the second term. So AG is negative. If


the temperature is very high, the second term may be positive enough to shift the position of
equilibrium in favour of the reactants.


For an endothermic reaction, the first term has a positive value.
the value of is negative, the second term is positive. The reaction will not occur because


both terms are positive, making the value of AG positive.
If the value of is positive, the second term is negative. The reaction is unlikely to be
spontaneous if the temperature is low because is More likely to have a greater positive value
than the negative value of the second term. So AG is positive. If the temperature is very high, the
second term may be negative enough to overcome the positive value of and make AG
negative. So the reaction is more likely to be spontaneous at a higher temperature. This mirrors what
we know about the effect of temperature on equilibrium: for an endothermic reaction, a higher


temperature shifts the position of equilibrium in favour of the products.
We can see the effect of temperature on the spontaneity of the reaction if we rework Worked example 7 at


a temperature of 1200 K.
Comparing Gibbs free energy values


Table 23.2 shows some values for some standard molar Gibbs free energy changes of formation.
You learned in Chapter 6 that the standard enthalpy change of an element is zero. Similarly, the standard
Gibbs free energy change of formation of an element is zero. Many compounds in the solid state have high
negative values of Gibbs free energy change of formation. Many gases and liquids have standard Gibbs
free energy change values that are negative but many others, such as ethene, have positive values. The

standard Gibbs free energy change of formation also depends on the state. For example, AG? is
—237.2 but is —228.6 kj


23.6 Gibbs free energy calculations


Gibbs free energy change of reaction


IMPORTANT
Note that for any type of enthalpy change, e.g. enthalpy change of formation, or enthalpy change of
reaction, you can get a corresponding Gibbs free energy change, e,g. The Gibbs free


energy change you will be using will usually be the Gibbs free energy change of formation.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
8 Calculate the Gibbs free energy change for the decomposition of zinc carbonate at 1200 K.
ZnCO3(s) ZnO(s) + = +71.0 kj
Values for in J = +213.6, ZnCO3(s) = +82.4, ZnO(s) = +43.6
Solution
= +71.0 kj


= +174.8 J
system


AG® =
reaction
= — 1200 x (+174.8)
= 71.000 — 209 760


AG® =


As the value of AG® is negative, the reaction is spontaneous at 1200 K.


 
The standard Gibbs free energy change of reaction is the Gibbs free energy change when the amounts of
the reactants shown in the stoichiometric equation react under standard conditions to give products. The


reactants and products must be in their standard states.
The method of calculating Gibbs free energy change of reaction uses an energy cycle similar to the


enthalpy cycles you used to calculate the enthalpy change of reaction in Chapter 6 (see Figure 23.8).

AG



 
elements in their


standard states


 


 


 
Figure 23.8: A free energy cycle for calculating the standard Gibbs free energy of reaction. The dashed line shows the


indirect (two-step) route.


 
Using the same ideas as in Hess’s law, we see that:
AG? = AGP +


= AGP — AGE
Another way of writing this is:


—


reactants


reaction


IMPORTANT


= XAGS


products
If you are doing a calculation to find you do not have to draw an energy cycle unless asked.


Just use =
To calculate the Gibbs free energy change of reaction from an energy cycle like this, we use the following


procedure:


write the balanced equation at the top
draw the cycle with the elements at the bottom


draw in all arrows making sure that they go in the correct directions


calculate


= — AGF taking into account the number of moles of reactants and products.
Table 23.2: Standard molar Gibbs free energy changes of some solids, liquids, gases and aqueous ions. The states are


shown as state symbols after each substance.


 


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
9 Draw a Gibbs free energy cycle to calculate the standard Gibbs free energy change of decomposition


of sodium hydrogencarbonate.
2NaHCO3(s) > + CO2(g) +
The relevant Gibbs free energy values are:
[NaHCO3(s)] = —851.0
= kj
=
= —237.2


Solution


The Gibbs free energy cycle is shown in Figure 23.9.


 


 


 


 


 

2 + +
A
\ /

\ /


 


+ 2C(graphite) + +


 


 
Figure 23.9: The free energy cycle for the decomposition of sodium hydrogencarbonate. The dashed line shows the


two-step route.


 
= AGP — AGP

= +
+ — 2 x



(—1044.5) + (—394.4) + (—237.2) — {2 x (—851.0)}

—


+25.9 kj


The value of


reaction


is positive. So under standard conditions, the reaction is not spontaneous.


However, does vary with temperature. At a higher temperature the reaction is spontaneous.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
10 Calculate the standard Gibbs free energy change of the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen.
+ O2(g) >


(The relevant Gibbs free energy value is: = —237.2
Note that the values of for both hydrogen and oxygen are zero, as they are elements in their

standard states.

Solution

~
= 2 — {2 x + AGP


0


= —546.4 kj


The value of is negative. So under standard conditions, the reaction is spontaneous.


 


Gibbs free energy and work
Gibbs free energy change can be thought of as part of the enthalpy change that is needed to do work. If we
rearrange the equation AG = AH — TAS as AH = AG + TAS, we can regard the part as being the
energy unavailable to do work because it is involved with the disorder of the system (Figure 23.10). The AG


part is free energy that is available to do work, e.g. driving the charge in electrochemical cells.


total energy change


 


 


 


 
AG
energy available energy


to do work not available


to do work


Figure 23.10: The enthalpy change of a reaction at constant temperature can be split into two parts.


 


Gibbs free energy change and direction of chemical change
Gibbs free energy of formation is a measure of the stability of a compound. The more negative the value of
AGF, the greater the stability of the compound. It is unlikely to decompose. If AGP is positive, the compound


is likely to be unstable with respect to its elements. For example:


+ > HI(g) = +1.7


The Gibbs free energy change of reaction is also a measure of the feasibility of a reaction. Reactions with


negative values of are likely to be feasible (spontaneous), whereas those with positive values are


less likely to be spontaneous.


When is in chemical equilibrium and the amounts of products and reactants balance, the


value of iS =


The products predominate if the value of has a fairly low negative value, e.g. —10


reaction


The reactants predominate if the value of has a slightly positive value, e.g. +10 kJ


reaction
The reaction can be regarded as complete if the value of is high and negative, e.g. —60 mol


-1
The reaction can be regarded as not being feasible (spontaneous) at all if the value of is high


and positive, e.g. +60


Question
10 Calculate the standard Gibbs free energy change of reaction in each of the following using the
standard molar values for Gibbs free energy change given here. In each case, comment on whether

the reaction is spontaneous or not, under standard conditions.


Values for in C3Hg(g) = —23.4,
= —394.4, = —742.2, = —273.2,
= —120.4, MgO(s) = —569.4, NaCl(s) = —384.2,

NH,NO3(s) = —184.0, N2O(g) = +104.2
> +

+


+ 2MgO(s)


+ +


+ Fe203(s) 3MgO(s) + 2Fe(s)


Gibbs free energy change and standard electrode potential
In Chapter 20 we learned that the standard electrode potential, can be used to determine whether a


reaction is feasible or not.
If the value of E&, is zero then the reaction is in an equilibrium where the products and reactants are


balanced. The position of equilibrium is neither to the right nor to the left.


e If the value of E&


is about +0.1 V, there are more products than reactants.


e If the value of is about —0.1 V, there are more reactants than products.


If the value of


more positive than about +0.6 V the reaction goes to completion.


the value of E&, is more negative than about —0.6 V there is no reaction or minimal reaction.
Since the values of E&, and AG® both tell us about whether a reaction is feasible or not, there must be a


relationship between them.
This relationship is:
AG® =
where:
AG® is the standard Gibbs free energy in J
nis the number of moles of electrons transferred in the cell reaction


F is the charge on a mole of electrons in C (this is the Faraday, 96 500 C


E&, is the standard cell potential.


IMPORTANT
Note that when you apply the equation = the units of are (not KJ
This is because the equation is derived from a relationship between entropy, enthalpy change and

temperature and the units of entropy are J



WORKED EXAMPLE
11 Calculate the standard free energy change for the reaction of magnesium with zinc ions and state


whether the reaction is feasible.


Mg(s) + Mg?*(aq) + Zn(s)
Mg?*(aq) + = Mg(s) ES, =
+ = Zn(s) =


Solution


Step the value of E&


‘cell*
ES, = —0.76 + (+2.38) = +1.62 V


Step 2: Note the number of electrons transferred = 2
Step 3: Substitute the values into the expression:


AG® =


cell


AG® = —2 x 96 500 x +1.62 = —313
So the reaction is feasible. It will go to completion since the value of AG® is large and


negative.


 


Question
11 Calculate the Gibbs free energy for these reactions and state, giving a reason for the position of


equilibrium for the reaction.
+ Pb?*(aq) > + Pb(s)
+ = Sn(s)


Pb2*(aq) + 2e7 = = -0.13V

+ Ag(aq) +

Fe3+(aq) + = Fe2+(s)
Ag*(aq) + e~ Ag(s) =

+ + Al(s)


Ce3+(aq) + = Ce(s) = -2.33V


+ 3e7 = Al(s)
the feasibility of the reactions in parts a, b and using the equation


AG® =


‘cell


 
looking at the coursebook, make a list of the equations relating to AS and AG that you


have learned during this chapter. Compare your list to that made by another learner.
Which equations did you have most difficulty remembering? What strategies will you employ to


help you remember them?
with another learner the three different equations that give information about the


feasibility of a reaction.

What problems did you encounter while describing these methods? How did it help to have two of
| you discussing the problem? |


SUMMARY


Entropy, S, is the number of possible arrangements of the particles and their energy in a given system.
A spontaneous change or feasible reaction involves an increase in total entropy (AS is positive). If a reaction is not


feasible, there is a decrease in entropy (AS is negative).


The entropy increases as a substance changes state from solid to liquid to gas or dissolves to form a solution.
A knowledge of the structures and states of reactants and products helps us make generalisations about whether or


not the entropy of the reactants is greater than the entropy of the products.


The entropy change in the system is given by ASsystem = —


Gibbs free energy can be calculated using the Gibbs equation = —
The Gibbs free energy change of a reaction can be calculated from Gibbs free energy changes of formation using


the relationship = — ZAG Bactants


A reaction is feasible if the sign of AG is negative.


The feasibility of a reaction can be predicted using the equation =


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
and diamond are both forms of carbon. Their standard molar entropies are:


= 5-70 J = 2-40 J
Suggest why the standard molar entropy of graphite is greater than that of


diamond. [2]


Calculate the entropy change of the process Cgraphite > at 298 K. [1]
Explain why you would be unlikely to make diamonds from graphite at atmospheric


temperature and pressure. [1]
Graphite reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. Suggest whether the entropy of the


products is greater or less than the entropy of the reactants? Explain your answer. [2]
[Total: 6]
2 When ethanol undergoes combustion, carbon dioxide and water are formed.
+ 302(g) 2CO2(g) +


Calculate the standard entropy change for this reaction.
Values for in J = 160.7, = 213.6, = 69.90, =


205.0 [6]
the Gibbs free energy for this reaction.


Values for in kJ =


= [3]
c your answers from parts a and b to calculate the value of the enthalpy change at


298 K. [3]


[Total: 12]
°C ice changes to water.


> AH® = +6.01


Explain why the entropy change of the system is positive. [2]
b Some water is heated until it boils. Compare and contrast the entropy change while the
water is being heated to the entropy change when the water boils. Explain any


differences. [4]
and bromine are both liquids. The standard molar entropy of water is 69.9 J
The standard molar entropy of bromine is 174.9 J Suggest why these


values are different even though they are both liquids. [4]


Q
When 2 g of potassium chloride is dissolved in 50 cm3 water, the entropy of the system
increases. A further 2 g of potassium chloride is added. The entropy still increases but by


a smaller amount. Explain this difference. [4]


[Total: 14]
Barium carbonate decomposes when heated.


BaCO3(s) > BaO(s) +
your knowledge of Hess cycles from Chapter 6 to calculate the enthalpy change of


this reaction.
Express your answer to three significant figures.
AH? [BaCO3(s)] = —1216.0
AH? [BaO(s)] = —553.5 kj

AH? [CO2(g)] = —393.5 kj
your answer to part a and the data below to calculate for this reaction



under standard conditions.
Express your answer to three significant figures.
AS® [BaCO3(s)] = +112.1
AS® [BaO(s)] = +70.40 J
AS® = +213.6 J [5]
the value of the Gibbs free energy for this reaction at 298 K.
= J


=
= —394.4 J [2]
d whether or not this reaction is feasible at 298 K. Explain your answer. [1]


e the temperature at which this reaction has a total entropy value of zero. [4]


[Total: 14]
a_ For each of the following changes, state whether the entropy of the system


decreases or increases.
In each case, explain your answer in terms of the order or disorder of the particles.
+ aq > Na*(aq) + [5]


> [3]
table shows the formula, state and standard molar entropies of the first five


straight-chain alkanes.


 


i Describe and explain the trend in the standard molar entropies of these alkanes. [4]
ii Estimate the value of the standard molar entropy of the straight-chain alkane with


the formula [1]
[Total: 13]


aii Define standard free energy change of formation. [2]
ii Write a balanced equation to represent the standard free energy change of


formation of ethane. Include state symbols in your answer. [2]
standard free energy change of formation of ethane is —32.9 kJ The standard


entropy change of the system for this reaction is J
i State the relationship between standard free energy change of formation, standard


entropy change of the system and the enthalpy change. [1]
ii Explain why the reaction can be feasible, even though the value of the standard


entropy change of the system is negative. [3]
Ethane undergoes combustion to form carbon dioxide and water.
+ +
Calculate the free energy change of combustion for this reaction.
Values for in kJ = —32.9, = —394.4, = —237.2


[Total: 11]
Calcium carbonate decomposes when heated to form calcium oxide and carbon


dioxide.


CaCO3(s) CaO(s) +
the entropy change of the system for this reaction.


Values for in J CaCO3(s) = +92.9, CaO(s) = +39.7, = +213.6 [2]
Calculate the enthalpy change for this reaction.


Values for CaCO3(s) = —1206.9, CaO(s) = —635.1, = —393.5 [2]
c your answers to parts a and b to calculate the Gibbs free energy change of this


reaction at 298 K. [5]
Explain why the reaction is not spontaneous at 298 K even though the entropy change of


the system has a positive value. [3]
[Total: 12]
Water is formed when hydrogen burns in oxygen.
+ O2(g) = —561.6


the entropy change of the system for this reaction.


Values for in J = +130.6, = +205.0, = +69.9 [3]
your answer to part a and the information at the start of the question to calculate a


value for the Gibbs free energy change of this reaction. [5]
Suggest whether or not this reaction is feasible at room temperature. Explain your


answer. [1]
your answer to part b to suggest a value for the standard Gibbs free energy of


formation of Explain your answer. [2]


[Total: 11]
ions, oxidise Fe2*(aq) ions.


+ 5Fe?*(aq) + + +


Deduce the value of E&, for this reaction.


+ 8H*(aq) +
=

3+ —
+ e~ = is
ii Explain how you know that this reaction is feasible. [1]
Nickel is added to aqueous ions. A learner suggested that the following
reaction should take place.
Ni(s) + Mn2*(aq) > + Mn(s)
The value of E&, for this reaction is —0.94 V.
i Calculate the Gibbs free energy for this reaction.
(F = 96 500 C
ii Use this value to deduce the feasibility of this reaction, the position of equilibrium
and the relative value of K, (high or low). [2]
Cadmium reacts with ions in aqueous solution:
Cd(s) + Cu2+(aq) + Cu(s)
i Calculate the Gibbs free energy for this reaction.

Values for = + 65.5, Cd?*(aq) = —77.6 [2]
ii the value of E&, for this reaction.
(F = 96 500 C
[Total: 12]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
define the term entropy as being the number of possible
arrangements of the particles and their energy in a given


system
predict and explain the sign of the entropy changes that occur
during a change in state, during a temperature change and
during a reaction in which there is a change in the number of


gaseous molecules
calculate the entropy change for a reaction using standard


entropy values of the reactants and products
perform calculations using the Gibbs equation = —

TAS®

determine if a reaction is feasible by referring to the sign of
AGe
predict the effect of temperature change on the feasibility of a 23.5

reaction when given standard enthalpy and entropy changes


predict the feasibility of a reaction using the equation =

— 23.6



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Working in your group, answer these questions:
Write down the electronic configuration of:
(Ti) atom


ion.
The oxidation number of manganese can vary. What is its oxidation number in the following


compounds?


a MnO,


b
Draw a dot-and-cross diagram to show the bonding in an ammonium ion, Only include the


outer shell electrons.
Using the standard electrode potentials in Appendix 2, explain why magnesium (Mg) can displace


silver ions (Ag*) from a solution of silver nitrate.
Work with a partner to write a general set of rules to derive the expression for the equilibrium


constant, for a reaction such as:


mA(aq) + nB(aq) = pC(aq) +


 
Most cancers are associated with abnormal DNA replication. During DNA replication, the double helix
‘unwinds’ to form the template for a new strand. When the process goes wrong, this can produce
mutations or can accelerate out of control. This results in cancerous tumours that can grow rapidly and
interfere with normal cells. Finding ways to fight cancers remains one of the main areas of medical


research today.
Cis-platin is an anti-cancer drug, first used in chemotherapy in the 1970s. The drug is a compound of
platinum, a transition element. Molecules of cis-platin are made up of platinum(II) ions, with dative
bonds to two chloride ions and two ammonia molecules. The bonds are arranged around the central


ion in a flat, square planar shape. Its structure is shown in Figure 24.1.
_-NH3




cl cl


Figure 24.1: The square planar shape of cis-platin.


 
The cis-platin can be taken by patients in solution and can pass through cell membranes and into the
nucleus of the cell. There it can form a new platinum complex that can form a bridge within a DNA

strand. This ‘bridging’ can also take place to a lesser extent between the two strands in DNA.
With the platinum complex inserted into the strands, replication is disrupted, so the cell dies. If fast-



growing tumour cells are treated with cis-platin, the tumour shrinks and the cancer goes into


remission. This means that the signs and symptoms of the cancer disappear.
However, cis-platin can also interfere with DNA replication in normal healthy cells. Therefore, how
effective it is in fighting cancer depends on the balance between the death of healthy cells and the
death of cancerous cells. The cis-platin particularly affects fast-growing cells. So, the production of
white blood cells in bone marrow can be disrupted. This can leave patients open to infectious diseases

that would be no problem for a healthy person.
Cis-platin can also cause hair loss, kidney damage, and a range of other side-effects, such as hearing
loss. Yet, despite the discovery of many more complex, modern drugs, cis-platin is still used to treat a


variety of cancers. It is often used as part of a combined programme of drugs.


Questions for discussion
Carry out some research to find out more details of how cis-platin makes the ‘bridges’ in DNA to


disrupt replication.


Working with another learner or group of learners:
e Discuss the use of drugs to treat life-threatening diseases, despite the side-effects that the drugs


themselves can cause.


 


24.1 What is a transition element?
The transition elements are found in the d block of the Periodic Table, between Groups 2 and 13. However,


not all d-block elements are classified as transition elements.


IMPORTANT
A transition element is a d-block element that forms one or more stable ions with an incomplete d sub-


shell.


 


We do not define scandium (Sc) and zinc (Zn) as transition elements.
Scandium, with the electronic configuration [Ar] 3d! forms only one ion, This 3* ion has no


electrons in its 3d sub-shell: the electronic configuration of is just its argon core, [Ar].
Zinc, with the electronic configuration [Ar] 3d?° 4s2, forms only one ion, This ion has a


complete 3d sub-shell: the electronic configuration of is [Ar]


So neither scandium nor zinc forms an ion with an incomplete d sub-shell.
In this chapter we will be looking at the transition elements in the first row of the d block. These are the


metals titanium (Ti) through to copper (Cu), according to the definition above.


Electronic configurations


Atoms of transition elements
Table 24.1 shows the electronic configurations of the atoms in the first row of the transition elements. In
atoms of the transition elements, the 4s sub-shell is normally filled and the rest of the electrons occupy


orbitals in the 3d sub-shell. However, chromium and copper atoms are the exceptions.
Chromium atoms have just one electron in the 4s sub-shell. The remaining five electrons are arranged in


the 3d sub-shell so that each of its five orbitals is occupied by one electron.
Copper atoms also have just one electron in the 4s sub-shell. The remaining ten electrons are arranged in


the 3d sub-shell so that each orbital is filled by two electrons.
titani
vanadium (V) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s2 3p® 3d3


chromium (Cr) 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 3d5


 


Table 24.1: Electronic configurations of the first row of transition elements.


 

lons of transition elements
The transition elements are all metals. In common with all metals, their atoms tend to lose electrons so
they form positively charged ions. However, each transition metal can form more than one positive ion. For
example, the common ions of copper are Cu* and Cu2*. We say that the transition metals have variable
oxidation states. The resulting ions are often different colours.


Look at the ions of vanadium in their different oxidation states (Figure 24.2).


a b c d
Figure 24.2: Vanadium and its oxidation states: a a solution containing ions, b a solution containing VO2* ions, a


solution containing V3* ions, da solution containing ions.


 


Table 24.2 shows the most common oxidation states of the first row of the transition elements.


(C9


manganese


Table 24.2: Common oxidation states of the transition elements.


 


 
It is the similarity in the energy of the 3d and 4s atomic orbitals that make these variable oxidation
numbers possible. Because there are variable oxidation states, the names of compounds containing
transition elements must have their oxidation number included, e.g. manganese(IV) oxide, and


chloride,


IMPORTANT
When transition elements form ions, their atoms lose electrons from the 4s sub-shell first, followed by


3d electrons.


 
Notice the partially filled d sub-shells in the following examples of ions (see definition of transition element
earlier in this section):
V atom = 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 3d3 4s?
V3+ ion = 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d?
Fe atom = 1s? 2s? 2p® 3p® 3d® 4s?
Fe3+ jon = 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d5
Cu atom = 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 3d?° 4s?


ion = 1s? 2p® 3s? 3p® 4s°


The most common oxidation state is +2, usually formed when the atom of a transition element loses its


two 4s electrons.
The maximum oxidation number of the transition elements at the start of the row involves all the 4s and 3d
electrons in the atoms. For example, vanadium’s maximum oxidation state is +5, involving its two 4s


electrons and its three 3d electrons.
At the end of the row, from iron onwards, the +2 oxidation state becomes most common as 3d electrons


become increasingly harder to remove as the nuclear charge increases across the period.
The higher oxidation states of the transition elements are found in complex ions or in compounds formed


with oxygen or fluorine. Common examples are the chromate(VI) ion, and the manganate(VIl) ion,



Question
1 State the electronic configurations of each of the following atoms and ions:

ii Cr
Co





b why scandium (which forms only one ion, and zinc (which forms only one ion,


are not called transition elements.


c Explain why the maximum oxidation state of manganese is +7.
back at the different oxidation states of vanadium shown in Figure 24.2. State the oxidation


state of the vanadium in each test-tube a-d.
e (Zr) is in the second row of transition elements beneath titanium in the Periodic Table.
Its electronic configuration is [Kr] 4d? where [Kr] represents the electronic configuration of


krypton, the noble gas with atomic number 36.


i Predict the maximum stable oxidation state of zirconium and explain your answer.
ii Give the formula of the oxide of zirconium, assuming zirconium exhibits the oxidation state

given in part e i.
Swap your answers to Question 1 with another learner and find any differences. Discuss the
differences and explain your reasoning to each other before agreeing on a final answer. Now mark
your answers together against the correct ones provided.



24.2 Physical and chemical properties of the


transition elements

The transition elements commonly have physical properties that are typical of most metals:

they have high melting points

e they have high densities
they are hard and rigid, and so are useful as construction materials

they are good conductors of electricity and heat

e they have variable oxidation states

they behave as catalysts


they form complex ions (see Section 24.1)


they form coloured ions (see Section 24.1).


Redox reactions
We have seen how the transition elements can exist in various oxidation states. When a compound of a
transition element is treated with a suitable reagent, the oxidation state of the transition element can


change in the reaction.
Whenever a reaction involves reactants that change their oxidation states, the reaction is a redox reaction.
Redox reactions involve the transfer of electrons. Remember that a species (atom, molecule or ion) is
reduced when its oxidation state is reduced. The oxidation state changes to a lower value. An oxidation
state is lowered when a species gains electrons, and, when it is being reduced, it acts as an oxidising


agent.
Example 1


In the half-equation:
+ Fe?*(aq)


pale yellow pale green
has been reduced to by gaining one electron. In the equation above, is acting as an


oxidising agent, an electron acceptor.
For this reaction to happen, another half-equation is needed in which the reactant loses one or more


electrons. The full reaction needs a reducing agent, an electron donor.
In Chapter 20 we saw how we can use standard electrode potential values, to predict whether or not


such reactions could possibly take place.


Another half-equation we could consider combining with the reduction of half-equation is:


+ 8H*(aq) + — +
purple pale pink


Here the ion is also acting as an oxidising agent, an electron acceptor.
Both half-equations are written below as they appear in tables of data showing standard electrode


potentials:

+ 8H*(aq) + 5e7


+ Fe = 41.52V
So the question is: Can Fe?* ions oxidise to ions, or can ions in acid solution oxidise
ions to ions? In other words, which is the more powerful oxidising agent, Fe?* ions or


ions?
The magnitude of the positive values provides a measure of the tendency of the half-equations to proceed
to the right-hand side. The values show us that is more likely to accept electrons and proceed in
the forward direction, changing to than is to accept electrons and change to
is a more powerful oxidising agent than Therefore, ions are capable of


oxidising Fe2*(aq) ions to form So the top half-equation proceeds in the reverse direction.
We can now combine the two half-cells to get the overall reaction. Note that the sign of the / half-
cell has changed by reversing its direction. The Fe?* / Fe?* equation also has to be multiplied by 5 so that
the electrons on either side of the equation cancel out when we add the half-equations together. This does


not affect the value of E®.


Combining the two half-equations:
(aq) + E®
(aq) + +


+ = +152V


 
+ +


+ + E®


+0.75 V
The relatively large positive value of (+0.75 V) tells us that the reaction is likely to proceed in the


forward direction as written.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 24.1


 


Redox titration
We can use the reaction above to calculate the amount of iron ions) in a sample, such as an iron


tablet, by carrying out a titration.


Aknown volume (e.g. 25 of an unknown concentration of is placed in a conical flask.


e Asolution of a known concentration of potassium manganate(VIl) is put in a burette.
e The potassium solution is titrated against the solution containing in the


conical flask.
e During the reaction of with in the flask, the purple colour of the


ions is removed. The end-point is reached when the Fe?*(aq) ions have all reacted and the first
permanent purple colour appears in the conical flask. This is when the MnO,~(aq) ions become in

excess in the reaction mixture (Figure 24.3).



 


| Figure 24.3: ions can be used to determine the percentage of Fe2+ in an iron tablet. |
You can achieve a more accurate result for the mass of in a solution by using dichromate(VI) ions,
to oxidise it in a titration. This is because compounds such as potassium can


be prepared to a higher degree of purity than potassium manganate(VIl). In a titration with and
we need an indicator of the end-point that will be oxidised as soon as the has all


reacted.


The half-equation and value for E® for the use of dichromate as an oxidising agent is:
+ 14H*(aq) + 6e7


2Cr3+(aq) + =


WORKED EXAMPLE
g of iron ore were dissolved in acid, so that all of the iron present in the original ore was then
present as Fe?*(aq). The solution obtained was titrated against 0.0400 mol KMnO,(aq). The


titre was 23.50 cm3.
the number of moles of in the titre.
Solution to part a
Use the equation:

where n = number of moles, V = volume of solution in dm? and c = concentration.
n = x 0.0400
= 0.000 940 mol
b the number of moles of in the solution.
Solution to part b
The equation for the reaction in the titration is:
+ + 8H* > + +
number of moles of Fe?+ = 5 x 0.000 940
= 0.004 70 mol
Calculate the mass of iron in the solution (A, of iron is 55.8).
Solution to part c


moles of Fe = moles of = 0.004 70 mol
mass of Fe = A,
= 0.004 70 x 55.8


=


the percentage mass of iron in the 0.420 g of iron ore.


Solution to part d


percentage mass of iron = x 100%


62.4%


 


Example 2
Another example of a redox titration is the reaction of ions with ethanedioate ions,
The ethanedioate ion is derived from ethanedioic acid, formerly known as oxalic acid. The ethanedioate
ions can be oxidised by potassium manganate(VIl) in an acidic solution. A similar titration to the one above
can be carried out to find the unknown concentration of ethanedioate ions (toxic) in a solution or to
standardise potassium solution (when the sodium ethanedioate solution needs to be


warmed before titrating).
The half-equation for the oxidation of ethanedioate ions is:
+ 2e7
+3 +4
As we have just seen, the reduction of manganate(VIl) ions to is:
MnO, (aq) + 8H*(aq) + — Mn?*(aq) +


+7 +2


 
Combining the two half-equations to get the full redox equation we need to multiply the ethanedioate ions
half-equation by 5, and multiply the half-equation by 2. This will ensure that the 10


electrons cancel out on either side of the full equation:
Combining the two half-equations we get the full redox equation:
(aq) +
+2MnO, (aq) + 16H*(aq) +
2Mn?*(aq) +
2MnO, (aq) + + (aq)


— + +


 
Note from the redox equation that, in a titration calculation, the ion reacts with the


ethanedioate ion in the ratio 2: 5.
This reaction is an example of autocatalysis, as the ions formed act as a catalyst for reaction. The
transition elements and their ions can act as catalysts because they can vary their oxidation state in the
course of a reaction, accepting or losing electrons, and then reverting back to their original state. They can


also accept pairs of electrons into vacant d orbitals forming dative bonds with ligands.


Example 3
In this final redox example, we can consider the reaction of ions with iodide ions in aqueous
solution. We can add the two half-equations together if we multiply the / Cut half-equation by 2 in
order to cancel out the electrons:
+ 2Cut
+


2Cu2+ + 2Cut


 
If we add excess iodide ions to a solution of ions, we get iodine forming in solution and a


precipitate of iodide:


2Cu?*(aq) + > 2Cul(s) + equation 1
We can use this reaction to find the concentration of ions in a solution. The formation of iodine in
the reaction mixture means that we can use starch indicator to judge an accurate end-point in a titration


experiment.
With excess iodide ions added to the solution, we can add sodium thiosulfate solution of a known
concentration from a burette to the reaction mixture in a flask. The aqueous iodine, formed in the


reaction mixture reacts with the thiosulfate ions added:


+ > + equation 2
The brownish colour of the solution gets lighter as the iodine is used up. Now we can add the starch
solution, which turns blue / black with the remaining in the flask, to help us get a sharp end-point.
Then titrate slowly until the blue / black colour disappears when all the iodine has reacted, noting the


reading on the burette.
So, knowing the number of moles of thiosulfate ions added in the titration, from equation 2 we can deduce

that half that number of moles of must have been formed in equation 1. So, the number of moles of
that we started with in equation 1 must be twice that of the i.e. the same number of moles
as the thiosulfate ions added in the titration. From this we can calculate the concentration of the
ions in the initial solution (i.e. the number of moles in 1 or 1000 cm3).


WORKED EXAMPLE
2 cm? of copper(II) sulfate solution of unknown concentration reacted with excess potassium
iodide solution. The reaction mixture was then titrated against 0.0850 mol dm~? sodium thiosulfate


solution, using a starch indicator. The titre was 15.40 cm? when the blue / black colour disappeared.
Calculate the concentration of the sulfate solution.
Solution
First, calculate the number of moles of thiosulfate ions, in the titre.
Use the equation:



where n = number of moles, V = volume of solution in dm? and c = concentration.


n= x 0.0850 mol of thiosulfate ions
Working backwards from the two equations (as explained above this worked example):
2Cu2*(aq) + > 2Cul(s) +


+ > +
we can deduce that the number of moles of ions in the original solution is the same as the


number of moles of thiosulfate ions in the titre
15.40


X 0.0850 mol
Therefore, we can calculate the concentration (c) of the 25.00 cm? of sulfate solution by


re-arranging the equation n = V x cto


 
15.40 25.00


= * 0.0850 divided


= 0.0524 mol (to 3 significant figures)


 


 


Question
2 Write two half-equations for the reactions that take place when Fe?*(aq) is oxidised by


ions.
b the two half-equations and write the equation for the oxidation of by


ions.
¢ out the value of the cell made when the two half-cells in part a are connected and the
reaction in part b takes place. Discuss and explain what this value predicts about the likelihood of


Fe?*(aq) being oxidised by dichromate(VI) ions.


many moles of Fe2+(aq) can 1 mole of dichromate(VI) oxidise?
e titration, 25.0 of a solution containing ions was completely oxidised by 15.30


cm? of 0.001 00 mol potassium dichromate(VI) solution.
i Calculate the number of moles of potassium in 15.30 cm? of 0.001 00 mol


solution?


how many moles of were present in the 25.0 cm? of solution.


Calculate the concentration of the in the flask at the start of the titration.


 
Working as a pair, one person tells the other how to carry out a titration and process the results. Then
swap and let the other person explain how you can use the results of the titration to work out the
unknown concentration of a solution. Discuss any ways you can think of that would improve both

explanations.

At this point, reflect with your partner on your understanding of:


a_ the electronic configurations of the atoms and ions of transition elements
use of standard electrode potentials to predict the feasibility of reactions


reactions, including adding up half-equations


titration calculations.
How much did you know about these topics before starting this chapter? Has this improved? Do you

need to increase your knowledge further?



24.3 Ligands and complex formation
In the section above on redox reactions, we learned about the oxidation of ions. When these ions
are in solution the ion is surrounded by six water molecules. Each water molecule bonds to the central
ion by forming a dative (co-ordinate) bond from the oxygen atom into vacant orbitals on the ion
(Figure 24.4). The water molecules are called ligands and the resulting ion is called a complex ion. Its


formula is written as The shape of a complex with six ligands is octahedral.


2+


 


 


 
Figure 24.4: the complex ion formed between an Fe2+ jon and six water molecules. It is called a


ion.


 
All ligands can donate an electron pair to a central transition metal ion. The co-ordination number of a


complex is the number of co-ordinate (dative) bonds to the central metal ion.
Some ligands can form two co-ordinate (dative) bonds from each ion or molecule to the transition metal
ion. These are called bidentate ligands, as shown in Figure 24.6. Most ligands, such as water and


ammonia, form just one co-ordinate (dative) bond and are called monodentate ligands.


cl 2-


 



a b
Figure 24.5: The complex ion formed between a transition metal ion and a larger ligand can only fit four, not six, ligands
around the central ion. These are arranged in either a square planar shape (as ina or a tetrahedral shape (as


in b


 
r CH, 2+


 



Figure 24.6: is an example of a complex ion containing the bidentate ligand (abbreviated to


Another common bidentate ligand is the ethanedioate ion, (abbreviated to ‘ox’) e.g. in [Fe(ox)3]3.


 


cyanide ion
octahedral (see
Figure 24.4)
octahedral
tetrahedral (see
Figure 24.5b)


square planar
(see Figure


24.5a)
thiocyanate ion or
Fe(SCN)


ethanedioate ion (abbreviated to ‘ox’ - oxalate - |


in the formulae of complexes)
1,2-diaminoethane (abbreviated to ‘en’ in the


formulae of complexes)


Table 24.3: Some common ligands and their complexes.
octahedral


octahedral
octahedral (see


Figure 24.6)


 


 


hydroxide ion octahedral


 
A few transition metal ions (e.g. form linear complexes with ligands. The co-


ordination number in these complexes is 2 (Figure 24.7).


+




Figure 24.7: The cation has a linear structure.

 
Table 24.3 shows some common ligands. Note that the charge on a complex is simply the sum of the
charges on the central metal ion and on each ligand in the complex. Some complexes will carry no charge,


e.g.


ions can act as ligands. A single ion can form six co-ordinate bonds to a central transition
metal ion to form an octahedral complex. It is an example of a polydentate ligand called a hexadentate


ligand.
Question
3 State the oxidation number of the transition metal in each of the following complexes:






the formula of a complex formed between and


c ligands in Table 24.3 are bidentate?


Stereoisomerism in transition metal complexes


In Chapter 14 we learned about two types of stereoisomerism: geometric and optical isomerism.
The presence of a double bond in 1,2-dibromoethene means that two geometrical isomers (cis/trans
isomers) are possible. Geometric isomerism is also possible in transition metal complexes, where no double
bond exists. In this case, the term ‘geometric isomerism’ refers to complexes with the same molecular
formula but different geometrical arrangements of their atoms. Examples are any square planar complexes
with the general formula [M(A)2(B)2], where M is the transition element, and A and B are its surrounding
ligands. Cis- and trans-platin are geometric isomers (Figure 24.8). In cis-platin, the chlorine atoms are next


to each other in the square complex but in trans-platin, they are diagonally opposite.


cis-platin trans-platin


Figure 24.8: The geometrical isomers, cis-platin and trans-platin.


 
Cis-platin has been used as an anti-cancer drug. It acts by binding to sections of the DNA in cancer cells,
preventing cell division (see the ‘Fighting cancer’ section at the start of Chapter 24). Trans-platin does not


have the same beneficial medical effects.
The properties of geometrical isomers can be different. Differences in electronegativity of the atoms in
ligands forming the dative bonds to the central transition metal ion can result in polar and non-polar
complexes. For example, the cis-isomer will have two identiical groups on one side of any square planar
complex. So any difference in electronegativity between the two pairs of isomers will cause an imbalance
of charge, making a polar complex. The atoms with the higher electronegativity have a stronger pull on the
electrons in the dative bonds and will carry a partial negative charge. However, the trans-isomer will have
identical ligands directly opposite each other at the corners of the square planar complex. So the pull on
the electrons in the dative bonds to the central metal ion are perfectly balanced. This means that the


charge is balanced and results in a non-polar complex.
Octadedral complexes, with the general formula can also display geometric isomerism. An

example is the complex ion, (see Figure 24.9).
2+
NH3

7\ |
\ Co \

\ \




H20


cis-isomer trans-isomer


Figure 24.9: The cis- and trans- isomers of


 
Again, the cis-isomer is a slightly polar complex, whereas the trans-isomer is non-polar. The imbalance of
charge in cis-isomer results from the asymmetric shape of the isomer and the
difference in electronegativity between the oxygen and nitrogen atoms bonded to the central
The side of the complex with the water ligands will be partially negative as oxygen is more electronegative
than the nitrogen in the ammonia ligands. The differences in electronegativity still apply in the trans-
isomer but its symmetical arrangement ensures the charge in the complex is spread


evenly around the complex.
Stereoisomerism is also commonly shown by octahedral (six co-ordinate) complexes associated with


bidentate ligands. An example is the complex containing nickel as the transition metal and 1,2-
diaminoethane as the bidentate ligand (Figure 24.10). The two isomers are stereoisomers
because the two different molecules are mirror images of each other and cannot be superimposed. They


are optical isomers, differing only in their ability to rotate the plane of polarised light in opposite directions.


 


 


r 4


2+





 


 
Figure 24.10: The two non-superimposable optical isomers of a the full structure, b a simplified


structure with ‘en’ representing a molecule of 1,2-diaminoethane.


 


 
The complex ion consisting of bonded to two bidentate 1,2-diaminoethane (en) ligands and two


monodentate ligands, such as water or chloride ions, can form both geometric (cis/trans) isomers and


 
optical isomers. Look at the cis- and trans-isomers of in Figure 24.11,
simplified to
2+
a


4
i \ en;
i





cis-isomer trans-isomer


Figure 24.11: The geometric, cis- and trans- isomers of


 
Of the two cis- and trans- isomers of only the cis- isomer is optically active, with its two
non-superimposable mirror images. The symmetrical nature of the trans-isomers of
means that its mirror images can be superimposed so they do not display optical isomerism. Look at the


optical isomers of in Figure 24.12.
2+ 2+
en en


git \ i
Ni Ni \
L \

en en
1



Mirror

Figure 24.12: The non-superimposable, optical isomers of



Question


4 Cobalt forms a complex with the simplified structure:


 


the curve represents
i Give the co-ordination number of this complex.
ii Draw the stereoisomer of this complex.


Explain why this is a stereoisomer.
b i Draw the two geometrical isomers of Label the cis-isomer and the trans-


isomer.


the overall polarity of the trans-isomer of


Discuss your answers to Question 4, and your reasoning, with a partner.


Substitution of ligands


Copper complexes
The ligands in a complex can be exchanged, wholly or partially, for other ligands. This is a type of


substitution reaction. It happens if the new complex formed is more stable than the original complex.
The complexes of ions can be used to show ligand substitution reactions, also called ligand


exchange reactions.
Whenever we write we are really referring to the complex ion This ion gives a
solution of copper sulfate its blue colour. On adding sodium hydroxide solution, we see a light blue


precipitate forming.

Two water ligands are replaced by two hydroxide ligands in the reaction:
(aq) + Cu(OH), +

blue solution pale blue precipitate
If you now add concentrated ammonia solution, the pale blue precipitate dissolves and we get a deep blue

solution:

Cu(OH), + 4NH3(aq) >
pale blue precipitate
(aq) + + (aq)


deep blue solution
The first reaction can also be achieved by adding concentrated ammonia solution to copper sulfate solution
drop by drop or by adding a dilute solution of ammonia. The pale blue precipitate formed will then dissolve
and form the deep blue solution when excess ammonia is added. The structure of


is shown in Figure 24.13.
2+







Figure 24.13: The octagonal structure of


 
Water ligands in can also be exchanged for chloride ligands if we add concentrated


hydrochloric acid drop by drop. A yellow solution forms, containing the complex ion :


+ [CuCl]? (aq) +


blue solution yellow solution


The mixture of blue and yellow solutions in the reaction mixture gives it a greenish colour (Figure 24.14).


start here


  

this complex forms on the well-known blue this dark blue complex forms


adding concentrated HCI complex with water on adding concentrated NH3
Figure 24.14: The equations for the changes are:
+ +


+ 4NH3 +


 


Cobalt complexes
Aqueous cobalt(II) compounds also form complex ions. Whenever we write Co2+(aq), we are referring to the
complex ion This ion gives an aqueous solution of cobalt(II) sulfate its pink colour. On adding
sodium hydroxide solution, we see a blue precipitate of hydroxide forming, which turns red when


warmed if the alkali is in excess.


(aq) +20H (aq) +


pink solution blue precipitate
Water ligands in can also be exchanged for ammonia ligands if we add concentrated aqueous


ammonia drop by drop.


(aq) + 6NH3(aq) (aq) +


pink solution brown solution
The brown complex ion is oxidised by oxygen in the air to a complex

ion.
Adding concentrated hydrochloric acid drop by drop to an aqueous solution of cobalt(II) ions results in the
formation of a blue solution containing the tetrahedral complex


+ (aa) +


pink solution blue solution
Aqueous cobalt(II) ions usually form tetrahedral complexes with monodentate anionic ligands such as


and


Question
5 cobalt chloride paper gets its blue colour from [CoCl,]?~ ions.


Give the oxidation number of the cobalt in this complex.
cobalt chloride paper is used to test for water. If water is present, the paper turns pink as a


complex forms between the cobalt ion and six water ligands (Figure 24.15).
Write an equation to show the ligand substitution reaction that takes place in a positive test for


water.
equation correctly describes the reaction of hydrated ions with concentrated


hydrochloric acid?
+ > +
+ > +
C + > +
D + > +


Discuss with a partner the thought processes you go through to deduce the oxidation number of the
central transition element in a complex (Question 5a). Working together, list the sequence of steps


that another learner could follow.
Discuss the option you chose in Question explaining why you think the three other options are


incorrect.


  


Figure 24.15: A positive test for the presence of water using anhydrous cobalt chloride paper.


 
Stability constants
Aqueous solutions of transition element ions are hydrated. They are complex ions with water molecules


acting as ligands, forming dative (coordinate) bonds to the central metal ion.


Different ligands form complexes with different stabilities. For example, when we add concentrated
aqueous ammonia to an aqueous solution of sulfate, the ammonia ligands displace water ligands


in a stepwise process.
+ NH3(aq) = +


+ NH3(aq) = +
As we increase the concentration of ammonia, this process continues until four of the water molecules are
replaced by ammonia molecules. The solution formed is a deep blue colour. The overall ligand substitution


reaction is:


+ = (aq) +


blue solution deeper blue solution
We can think of this exchange of ligands in terms of competing equilibria of the forward and backward
reactions. The position of equilibrium lies in the direction of the more stable complex. In this case, the
complex with ammonia as a ligand is more stable than the complex with just water as a ligand. If we dilute
the complex with water, the position of equilibrium shifts to the left and a complex with more water

molecules as ligands forms.
The stability of the complex is expressed in terms of the equilibrium constants for ligand displacement.
This is called the stability constant. Usually an overall stability constant, is given rather than the
stepwise constants. The method for writing equilibrium expressions for stability constants is similar to the


one we used for writing (see Section 21.1). So for the equilibrium:
+ +


the expression for the stability constant is:




Note:
water does not appear in the equilibrium expression because it is in such a large excess that its


concentration is regarded as being constant
the units for the stability constant are worked out in the same way as for the units of K, Section


8.3). For example, in the above case:





x (mot


= dm”


=


 
Stability constants are often given on a scale. When expressed on a scale, they have no units


(see Table 24.4).
Stability constants can be used to compare the stability of any two ligands. The values quoted usually give


the stability of the complex relative to the aqueous ion where the ligand is water.


IMPORTANT


The higher the value of the stability constant, the more stable the complex.


 
Table 24.4 gives some values of stability constants for various complexes relative to their


aqueous ions.


16.9

2-hydroxybenzoate
  


1,2-dihydroxybenzene


 


Table 24.4: The stability constants of some complexes of copper.


 
From Table 24.4 you can see that, in general, complexes with bidentate ions (2-hydroxybenzoate and 1,2-


dihydroxybenzene) have higher stability constants than those with monodentate ligands.
We can use the values of the stability constants to predict the effect of adding different ligands to complex
ions. For example, the addition of excess ammonia to the complex should result in the
formation of a dark blue solution of the ammonia complex. That is because the stability constant of the
ammonia complex is higher than that of the chloride complex. The position of equilibrium is shifted to the


right in the direction of the more stable complex.
Addition of excess 1,2-dihydroxybenzene to the dark blue ammonia complex results in the formation of a
green complex with 1,2-dihydroxybenzene. This is because the stability constant with the 1,2-
dihydroxybenzene is much higher than that for ammonia. You can see from Table 24.4 that the log of
for 1,2-dihydroxybenzene is 25.0, so the actual value of is 10 raised to the power 25, compared to the
actual value for ammonia of 10 raised to the power 13.1. This shows that the copper complex with 1.2-
dihydroxybenzene is much more stable than the complex ion formed with ammonia. These values of
predict that there will be hardly any of the copper complex with ammonia left in the equilibrium mixture


shown in the equation below:
OH Q
= 4NH,*


OH No


 


WORKED EXAMPLE


 
3 concentrated hydrochloric acid is added to copper(II) sulfate solution, the aqueous solution


formed contains and complex ions.
the expression for the stability constant for in an aqueous solution.


Solution
First of all write the chemical equation for the ligand exchange equilibrium mixture formed in


the reaction:
+ +
Then write the expression for (Remember that products go on the top line and reactants
on the bottom line in equilibrium expressions, and that is not included)




b Work out the units of for the expression in part a.
Solution
Substitute the unit of concentration (mol into your equilibrium expression from part a in


this question. Then cancel out the units.


(mol
=


(mol (mol
c Using Table 24.4, explain the proportions of the two complex ions present in the


equilibrium mixture.


Solution
As the value of for the chloride ion is given in the table as 5.6, this shows that the
actual value of is 10 raised to the power of 5.6 i.e. a very large number. This shows that
the concentration of products in the equilibrium expression, in this case the ions, is


much greater than the concentration of the reactant ions.
d When concentrated ammonia solution is added to chloride, explain what you would


see happen, using Table 24.4.


Solution
As the value for the complex with ammonia is a much larger value than that of
he complex with chloride ions, the ammonia molecules will displace the chloride ions from the
complex, forming a more stable complex of This will turn the


(greenish) yellow solution of the chloride complex a deep blue colour.
e exchange of ligands occurs step-by-step as successive ligands are replaced. For example
he second step in the exchange of water ligands for chloride ion ligands is shown by this


equation:


+ +


 
was found for this reaction that when a 0.15 mol dm~? solution of the complex ion
was mixed with 0.15 mol hydrochloric acid, the equilibrium concentration


of the complex was 0.10 mol
i Write an expression for the stability constant for this ligand exchange reaction.


Solution


= Gal


Calculate the value for for the reaction giving the units.


Solution


Work out the concentration of each of the ions at equilibrium:



At start 0.15 mol 0.15 mol


At equilibrium (0.15 — 0.10) mol (0.15 — 0.10) mol 0.10 mol


Then substitute the concentrations at equilibrium into the expression for in e i:


 
K, —


stab 0.05 mol x 0.05 mol


=


 


Question
6 a_ Write expressions for the stability constants for the following reactions:
i + 2NH3(aq) = +
+ +
+ 4NH3(aq) +
ion, Fe?*, in aqueous solution has six water molecules bonded to it as ligands.


i Draw the structure of this ion.
ii When thiocyanate ions, SCN-, are added to an aqueous solution of ions, the solution


turns red and one water molecule is replaced by a thiocyanate ion.

Use the concept of stability constants to explain why the reaction occurs.
the formula of the ion forming the red solution.



The stability constant for aqueous ions with as a ligand is 891 dm? The
stability constant for aqueous ions with fluoride ions, F~, as a ligand is 2 x 105 dm? mol


A solution containing fluoride ions is added to the red solution.


Would you expect to observe any changes? Explain your answer.
Now share and discuss your answers to Question 6 with another learner. Agree on a final set


of answers before checking them against the answers provided.


The colour of complexes
You will have now seen the striking colours of complexes containing transition metal ions. But how do these


colours arise?
White light is made up of all the colours of the visible spectrum. When a solution containing a transition


metal ion in a complex appears coloured, part of the visible spectrum is absorbed by the solution.
The colour we see is called the complementary colour, made up of light with frequencies not absorbed. For
example, ions absorb light from the red end of the spectrum, so the complementary colour seen


is a pale blue (called cyan). Here is a list of complementary pairs of colours:
red cyan
yellow blue


green magenta
You should be aware that mixing light of different frequencies does not produce the same colour as mixing


different colours of paint.
However, that still doesn’t explain why part of the spectrum is absorbed by transition metal ions. To answer


this question, we must look in more detail at the d orbitals in the ions (Figure 24.16).


 


dz


Figure 24.16: The degenerate d orbitals in a transition metal atom.


 
The five d orbitals in an isolated transition metal atom or ion are described as degenerate orbitals,


meaning they are all at the same energy level.
In the presence of ligands, a transition metal ion is not isolated. The dative (or co-ordinate) bonding from
the ligands causes the five d orbitals in the transition metal ion to split into two sets. The two sets of
orbitals are described as non-degenerate orbitals as they are at slightly different energy levels (see


Figure 24.17).
In a complex with six ligands, the ligands are arranged in an octahedral shape around the central metal
ion. The lone pairs donated by the ligands into the transition metal ion repel electrons in the two and
orbitals shown in Figure 24.17 more than those in the other three d orbitals. This happens because


these two d orbitals line up with the dative (co-ordinate) bonds in the complex’s octahedral shape. As the
electrons in the and d,2 orbitals are closer to the bonding electrons in the octahedral arrangement,
the repulsion between electrons increases. Therefore, the d orbitals are split, with these two d orbitals at a


slightly higher energy level than the dyz, and orbitals.


Look at the left-hand side of Figure 24.17.


excited electron


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
absorbs energy



energy absorbed
from visible spectrum
degenerate N N that corresponds
3d orbitals de dy to AE
splitting the the energy absorbed can be


d orbitals to give worked out by the equation:
non-degenerate


orbitals AE=hy
where vis the frequency
of light absorbed and


his constant


 


Figure 24.17: The splitting of the 3d orbitals in the octahedral complex ion.


 
A ion has an electronic configuration of [Ar] 3d9. Figure 24.17 shows how the nine d electrons are
distributed between the non-degenerate orbitals formed in a complex with ligands. The difference in the


energy between the non-degenerate d orbitals is labelled
AE corresponds to part of the visible spectrum of light. So, when light shines on the solution containing the
complex, an electron absorbs this amount of energy. It uses this energy to jump into the
higher of the two non-degenerate energy levels. In copper complexes, the rest of the visible spectrum that


passes through the solution makes it appear blue in colour.
The exact energy difference (AE) between the non-degenerate d orbitals in a transition metal ion is
affected by many factors. One of these factors is the identity of the ligands that surround the transition
metal ion. As you have seen, a solution containing is a light blue, whereas a solution
containing is a very deep shade of blue. The colour change arises because the
presence of the ammonia ligands causes the d orbitals to split by a different amount of energy. This means
that the size of AE changes and this results in a slightly different amount of energy being absorbed by
electrons jumping up to the higher orbitals. Therefore, a different colour is absorbed from visible light, so a


different colour is seen.
In tetrahedral complexes, such as the splitting of the d orbitals is different (Figure 24.18). The
bonding pairs of electrons from four ligands line up with the dyz, dyz and orbitals of the transition metal
ion. Unlike the octahedral arrangement, the and orbitals in a tetrahedral complex lie between the
metal-ligand bonds. So there is less repulsion between electrons in d,2_,2 or orbitals and the lone pairs
of bonding electrons donated by the ligands. Therefore, when the d orbitals split in this case, the or


d,2 are at a lower, more stable energy level than the and dyy orbitals.


 


 


 
      


 
A
Ky
AE


Figure 24.18: The splitting of the 3d orbitals in the tetrahedral complex ion.

 
Question



do we mean by degenerate atomic orbitals?


why an octahedral complex of a transition element is coloured.
the non-degenerate 3d orbitals in a ion on a diagram similar to Figure 24.18. The

electrons should be shown in the configuration that gives the lowest possible energy.
of ions is colourless.


Suggest a reason for this.
e of ions is colourless.


Suggest a reason for this.
f Make a brief PowerPoint presentation to explain the difference in the splitting of the 3d atomic


orbitals in the two complexes, and


REFLECTION
Working with a partner, each write a question and mark scheme. One of you devise an assessment
of the reactions of transition elements with ligands to form complexes, and describe the shapes
and bond angles of complexes, together with the types of stereoisomerism (cis/trans and optical
isomerism) shown by complexes. The other person can assess the use of / /


Fe?* and as examples of redox systems.
You can use your coursebook Exam-style questions to help with the style of your question, and on-
line answers to write a typical mark scheme. However, your questions and answers should be your


own work.
Then try to answer each other’s questions, giving your answers back for your partner to mark


using their mark scheme.
Use this exercise to give you an idea of your level of understanding about transition element


complexes and redox reactions. What have you learned from the activity?


 


SUMMARY
Each of the transition elements forms at least one ion with a partially filled d orbital. They are metals with similar


physical and chemical properties.
When a transition element is oxidised, it loses electrons from the 4s sub-shell first and then the 3d sub-shell to form


a positively charged ion.


Transition elements can exist in several oxidation states.
Many reactions involving transition elements are redox reactions. Some redox reactions are used in titrations to


determine concentrations.


A ligand is a molecule or ion with one or more lone pairs of electrons available to donate to a transition metal ion.
Transition elements form complexes by combining with ligands. Ligands bond to transition metal ions by one or


more dative (co-ordinate) bonds.


Ligands can be exchanged for other ligands in a complex. This can result in a change of colour.
Some transition element complexes exist as geometrical (cis/trans) isomers, e.g. cis- and trans-platin; others,


especially those associated with bidentate ligands with co-ordination number 6, may exist as optical isomers.


Ligand exchange can be described in terms of competing equilibria.
The stability constant, of a complex ion is the equilibrium constant for the formation of the complex ion in a


solvent from its constituent ions or molecules.
The higher the value of the stability constant, the more stable is the complex ion formed.


Transition metal compounds are often coloured because of d orbital splitting, caused by ligands.
The splitting is different in octahedral and tetrahedral complexes. Different ligands will split the d orbitals by

different amounts, resulting in differently coloured complexes.



 


 


 


the following terms:
element [1]
[1]


complex ion. [2]


[Total: 4]

2 Use sub-shell notation (1s? 2s? 2p®, etc.) to give the electronic configurations of the


following:
a anFeatom [1]
b ion


ion.


[Total: 3]
Give the formulae of two iron compounds in which iron has different oxidation


states. Give the oxidation states of the iron in each compound. [4]
Explain why complexes of iron compounds are coloured. [3]


[Total: 7]
4 Write balanced ionic equations and describe the observations for the reactions that


occur when:


sodium hydroxide solution is added to a solution containing [2]
b concentrated ammonia solution is added to a solution containing
(aq). [3]


[Total: 5]


half-cell reactions given below are relevant to the questions that follow.
Cl, + > =
Fe3+ +
+ 8H* > =


+ 4H* + > +


In order to standardise a solution of a learner weighed out 5.56 g of and
dissolved it in sulfuric acid. She then made it up to a total volume of 250 cm? with distilled water.
She took 25.0 cm? portions of this solution, and added 10 cm? of 2.00 mol sulfuric acid to
each. She then titrated these solutions against the potassium solution. The


average titre was 21.20


the electrode potentials, explain why she used sulfuric acid and not hydrochloric
acid in her titrations. [4]
b Calculate the concentration of the iron(II) sulfate solution. [3]
c i Write the full ionic equation for the reaction between the solution
and the sulfate. [2]
ii how the learner knows that she has reached the end-point for the
reaction. [1]


the concentration of the solution. [2]
the learner passed sulfur dioxide gas through 25.0 cm? of the solution,


calculate the volume of gas that would be required to completely decolorise the
(1 mol of gas occupies 24.0 dm? at room temperature and pressure) [5]
[Total: 17]
6 Copper forms complexes with chloride ions and with ammonia.


logio Kstab for aqueous Cu?* ions with as a ligand is 2.80
logio Kstab for aqueous Cu?* ions with NH3 as a ligand is 4.25


A few drops of hydrochloric acid are added to blue aqueous copper(II) sulfate.


i Copy and complete the equation for this reaction.
(aq)+


light blue yellow-green [2]


 
ii Describe and explain what happens when excess water is then added to the


reaction mixture in part i. [3]
Explain what happens in terms of ligand exchange, when concentrated aqueous


ammonia is added to the reaction mixture from part fi. [2]
b Aqueous copper ions form a complex with 1,2-diaminoethane, They also
form a complex with 1,3-diaminopropane


10919 for aqueous Cu?* ions with 1,2-diaminoethane as a ligand is 20.3


for aqueous ions with 1,3-diaminopropane as a ligand is 17.7
i Name the type of ligands that 1,2-diaminoethane and 1,3-diaminopropane are.


Explain your answer. [2]
which one of these ligands forms a more stable complex. Explain your
answer. [1]


can be abbreviated as ‘en’.
A complex of nickel ions, with 1,2-diaminoethane is octahedral in shape with

a co-ordination number of 6.
Draw the structures of the two stereoisomers of this complex. [4]
[Total: 14]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
explain what we mean by a transition element and describe
how transition elements have variable oxidation states,
24.1, 24.2
behave as catalysts, form complex ions, and form coloured
ions
state the electronic configuration of a first-row transition
element and of its ions and describe the tendency of transition | 24.2

elements to have variable oxidation states


describe and explain the use of / C2042~, / Fe2+
and / as examples of redox systems and predict, using 24.2
E® values, the feasibility of redox reactions involving transition


metal compounds
define the terms ligand and complex and explain the reactions
of transition elements with ligands to form complexes,


describing the shapes and bond angles of complexes
describe the types of stereoisomerism (cis/trans and optical
isomerism) shown by complexes, including those with


bidentate ligands
explain qualitatively how ligand exchange may occur and
describe the term stability constant, of a complex ion,


and write an expression for the stability constant of a complex
sketch the general shape of atomic d orbitals and describe the
splitting of degenerate d orbitals into two energy levels in


octahedral and tetrahedral complexes
explain the origin of colour in transition element complexes
and describe, in qualitative terms, the effects of different
ligands on the absorption of light, and hence the colour of a


complex.


 


images


 


 


 


 

LEARNING INTENTIONS



BEFORE YOU START


Working in your group, answer these questions:
The bond angles around a carbon atom in which its atomic orbitals are sp? hybridised is likely to


be:

109.5°
120°


180°
How many electrons are involved in a pi (m) bond?
1
2
3


4


Describe the reaction mechanism when HBr is reacted with ethene,
Discuss with a partner how you would name this compound:
CH3


cl
Discuss what happens in the substitution reaction that takes place between either chloroethane


and NaOH or chloroethane and HCN.


 
Benzene is a colourless, volatile liquid that has been used by chemists since the 1800s. It works well


as a solvent for other organic compounds, but is immiscible (does not mix) with water.
At one time, chemists used it with few precautions. However, we know now that it is highly toxic, and
is described as a carcinogen (a cancer-causing agent). It is particularly hazardous as it can be


absorbed through the skin.
Experiments in the 19th century showed that the formula of benzene was But the chemists


working around 1860 were still struggling to work out its structure.
Working as a pair, can you come up with a straight-chain structure for with each carbon forming


four bonds and each hydrogen one bond?


It was at that time that a German chemist called Friedrich August Kekulé had a fortunate dream. As
you have just done, he was working the problem of benzene’s structure. He grew tired and dozed off
and dreamt that the benzene molecules were snakes! One of the snakes bit its own tail, forming a
circle. When Kekulé woke up, he claimed that his dream inspired him to propose the structure shown in


Figure 25.1


ll | also shown as

|


H


Figure 25.1: The Kekulé structure of benzene.


 
You can find out how later chemists developed Kekulé’s structure to match their observations in


Section 25.1.


 


Figure 25.2: This is a vanilla orchid. Its seed pods contain a substance called vanillin.


 


Compounds based on benzene are found widely in nature, such as vanillin in vanilla (Figure 25.2).
Vanillin molecules are based on a benzene ring, as represented by the hexagon with a circle inside in
the structure shown below. Vanillin is used to flavour foods such as ice cream and chocolate. Its


structure is:
OH



Questions for discussion


Working with another learner or group of learners:
Carry out some research to find out how the dream of another chemist, Dmitri Mendeleev, led to


the design of the Periodic Table in 1869.
e Suggest a theory about the way the human brain works to explain the role of dreams in scientific

discoveries.



25.1 The benzene ring
The ‘benzene ring’ is a particularly important functional group found in many organic compounds. A
benzene ring is a hexagon made of six carbon atoms bonded together in a particular way. Benzene rings
are found in many compounds that are commercially important: for example, as medicines, dyes and


plastics.
Organic hydrocarbons containing one or more benzene rings are called arenes. In general, compounds of
benzene are known as aryl compounds or aromatic compounds; an example is chlorobenzene, which is one


of the halogenoarenes.
As you read in the section above, in Kekulé’s structure the hexagonal ring contained three double C=C


bonds. This is reflected in benzene’s name, which has the same ending as the alkenes.
As chemists developed analytical techniques, however, they found out that the benzene molecule was a
planar, perfectly symmetrical molecule. Kekulé’s structure would suggest three shorter double C=C bonds
and three longer C-C single bonds in the ring. This would produce a distorted hexagonal shape, not the


perfect hexagonal arrangement of carbon atoms in benzene’s actual molecules. Figure 25.3 shows how we


represent benzene’s skeletal formula.
Figure 25.3: The skeletal formula of benzene. It can also be used in displayed formulae of aryl compounds, as in the


figure below Figure 25.2, showing the structure of vanillin.


 
We can now measure actual bond lengths. This was impossible in the 19th century when Kekulé worked.
Table 25.1 shows that the bond length of the carbon-carbon bonds in benzene lies between the values for


C-C single bonds and C=C double bonds.
The chemistry of benzene also suggests that the Kekulé structure is incorrect. If there were three C=C
bonds in benzene it would undergo addition reactions in the same way as the alkenes (see Section 15.3).
However, this is not the case. For example, ethene will decolorise bromine water on mixing at room


temperature, but benzene needs much harsher conditions.


carbon to carbon bond in benzene 0.139


 


Table 25.1: Comparing bond lengths.


 
The actual structure of benzene can be explained by considering the bonding in the molecule. Each of the


six carbon atoms in the hexagonal ring is sp? hybridised (see Section 4.5), sharing:
one pair of electrons with one of its neighbouring carbon atoms


one pair of electrons with its other neighbouring carbon atom


one pair of electrons with a hydrogen atom.
These are three o (sigma) bonds. These covalent bonds are a pair of electrons found mainly between the
nuclei of the atoms bonded to each other. Each carbon atom with sp* hybrised atomic orbitals forms three
o bonds: so that leaves one electron spare on each of the six carbon atoms in benzene. Each carbon atom


contributes its one spare electron to a m (pi) bond (see Section 4.5).
However, the m bonds formed by benzene are not the same as the m bonds in an alkene C=C bond (see
Section 4.5). In an alkene, a m bond helps to bond one pair of carbon atoms to each other; but in benzene
six spare p orbital electrons are spread over all six carbon atoms in the hexagonal ring. The six electrons in


the m bonds are said to be delocalised.


The bonding in benzene is formed by the overlap of carbon p atomic orbitals, one from each of the six
carbon atoms. To achieve maximum overlap, the benzene molecule must be planar. The lobes of the p
orbitals overlap to form a ring of delocalised electrons above and below the plane of the carbon atoms in


the benzene molecule. This is shown in Figure 25.4.


 


H H
overlap of p orbitals
produces a ring of
delocalised electrons
above and below the
plane of benzene’s


carbon atoms


Figure 25.4: The n bonding in benzene. The three bond angles around each of the sp? hybridised carbon atoms are 120°.


 


Naming aryl compounds
You saw how to name aryl compounds with alkyl side-chains in Section 14.3. Some aryl compounds have


functional groups that are substituted directly into the benzene ring in place of a hydrogen atom.


You need to know the names of the compounds in Table 25.2.


chlorobenzene


nitrobenzene
2,4,6-tribromophenol: note the numbering of the carbon atoms in the benzene ring to describe


the position of each substituted group (see Section 14.3)


phenylamine


 
Table 25.2: The names of some aryl compounds. The phenyl group in a substituted benzene compound can be written as


CgHs; e.g. the structural formula of phenylamine is


 

Question
Give the number of electrons involved in the m bonding system in a benzene molecule.



b the type of atomic orbital that the electrons in part a come from.
c what we mean by the term delocalised electrons in benzene.
d the bonding in benzene with the m bonding in hex-3-ene.

e the displayed or skeletal formula of:


i 1,3,5-tribromobenzene


ii

f Name the molecules below:

i OH
CH3

Br


cl


cl
Choose a partner and discuss your answers to Question 1 part d together. Then write a mark scheme


for this question showing what each mark is given for.


Compare your mark scheme with those produced by other pairs of learners.


25.2 Reactions of arenes
Most reactions of benzene and other arenes maintain the highly stable delocalised ring of m bonding
electrons intact. This occurs by substituting an atom, or group of atoms, for one or more hydrogen atoms
attached to the benzene ring. Addition reactions into the benzene ring would disrupt the ‘aromatic
stabilisation’ achieved by the complete delocalisation in the ring. The initial attack is usually by an


electrophile, which is attracted to the high electron density around the benzene ring.


Electrophilic substitution with chlorine or bromine
Benzene will react with bromine in the presence of an anhydrous aluminium bromide catalyst. The


substitution reaction is:


Br


anhydrous
Al


O
At first sight, the electrophile that starts the attack on benzene is not obvious. The electrophile is created
when an aluminium bromide molecule polarises a bromine molecule. The molecule forms a dative (co-
ordinate) bond with aluminium bromide by donating a lone pair of electrons from one of its bromine atoms
into an empty 3p orbital in the aluminium. This draws electrons from the other bromine atoms in the


molecule, making it partially positive, and creating the electrophile.


We can think of the electrophile as a Br* cation:



The Br* cation and the ‘electron-rich’ benzene ring are attracted to each other, as the mechanism of
electrophilic substitution below shows. Remember that the curly arrows show the movement of a pair of


electrons:


H Br Br
stage 2


A similar reaction happens when chlorine gas is bubbled through benzene at room temperature in the


presence of a catalyst, such as aluminium chloride. The products of this electrophilic substitution are
chlorobenzene and hydrogen chloride. The catalysts in these reactions, AIBr3 and AICl3, are known as


halogen carriers.


 
When we halogenate methylbenzene or other alkylarenes, the halogen atom substitutes into the benzene
ring at positions 2 or 4. These positions are ‘activated’ by any electron-donating groups bonded directly to


the benzene ring (see Table 25.4 at the end of the chapter).
Other examples of benzene compounds that are activated in these positions are phenol and

phenylamine
So when we react methylbenzene with chlorine gas, using an anhydrous aluminium chloride catalyst, two
products can be made:


CH3

+ + +
cl



benzene benzene
If excess chlorine gas is bubbled through, we can form 2,4-dichloromethylbenzene, 2,6-
dichloromethylbenzene and 2,4,6-trichloromethylbenzene. (Remember that the 2 and 6 positions in


substituted arenes are equivalent.)
The carbon-halogen bond in halogenoarenes is stronger than the equivalent bond in a halogenoalkane,
making the halogenoarenes much less reactive. This is because one of the lone pairs on the halogen atom
overlaps slightly with the m bonding system in the benzene ring. This gives the carbon-halogen bond ina


halogenoarene a partial double bond character.
Notice that the methyl side-chain off the benzene ring is not affected under the conditions used in the
reaction above. However, we learned in Section 15.2 that chlorine will react with alkanes in the presence of
ultraviolet (UV) light or strong sunlight. This reaction of the alkanes is a free-radical substitution reaction.
So, if the chlorine gas is passed into boiling methylbenzene in the presence of UV light, the following


reaction takes place:
CH3
+ Clo + HCl


UV light
chloromethyl-


benzene


Note that there is no substitution into the benzene ring under these conditions.
In excess chlorine, eventually all three of the hydrogen atoms on the side-chain will be replaced by


chlorine atoms.


Question
2 Write the equation for the reaction of chlorine with benzene in the presence of an aluminium


chloride catalyst.


this type of mechanism for the reaction in part a.
the mechanism of the reaction in part a, with as the attacking species and using curly


arrows to show the movement of electron pairs.
the displayed formula of the ‘tri-substituted’ halogenoarene produced if methylbenzene is


added to excess bromine at room temperature in the presence of aluminium bromide.
e Suggest how the reaction in part d would differ if the methylbenzene and bromine were boiled in


the presence of UV light.


f Name the mechanism of the reaction in part e.


Nitration of benzene
The nitration of benzene is another example of an electrophilic substitution. Nitration refers to the
introduction of the group into a molecule. In this reaction the electrophile is the ion, known as
the nitronium ion (or cation). This is made from a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and


concentrated sulfuric acid:


HNO3 + > + +


This ‘nitrating mixture’ is refluxed with benzene at between 25 °C and 60 °C to make nitrobenzene:


O + +


The mechanism of the electrophilic substitution in this nitration is:


NO,
H NO2
+ stage 1 stage 2


NO,* +H
In stage 1 in the mechanism, the electrophile, is attracted to the high electron density of the
bonding system in benzene. A pair of electrons from the benzene ring is donated to the nitrogen atom in
and forms a new covalent bond. At this point, benzene’s delocalised ring of electrons is disrupted.


There are now four m bonding electrons and a positive charge spread over five carbon atoms.
However, the full delocalised ring is restored in stage 2 when the C-H bond breaks heterolytically (see
Section 14.7). Both electrons in the C-H covalent bond go into nitrobenzene’s m bonding system, and
hydrogen leaves as an H* ion. There are now six electrons spread over the six carbon atoms, so the


chemical stability of the benzene ring is retained in this substitution reaction.
In order to predict the products of further substitution into the benzene ring of the nitrobenzene formed, we
must consider the ‘directing effect’ of the nitro group. Further nitration of the nitrobenzene produces 1,3-
dinitrobenzene and 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene. Unlike the electron-donating methyl group in methylbenzene
(which activates the 2 and 4 positions in the benzene ring), the group is electron-withdrawing. This
type of group (which includes -COOH) deactivates the 2 and 4 positions in the benzene ring. Therefore,
when there is a nitro group bonded to the benzene ring, further substitutions are directed to the 3 and 5


positions (see Table 25.4 at the end of the chapter).


Question
3 Copy and complete the two equations below, which can both be used to show the nitration of


methylbenzene:


+ +


iii Name the possible mono-substituted products in parts i and ii.
2,4-dinitromethylbenzene and 2,4,6-trinitromethylbenzene are formed on further nitration of


methylbenzene.


Draw the displayed formula of each compound.
b also undergoes electrophilic substitution when refluxed with fuming sulfuric acid for
several hours. This is called sulfonation. The electrophile is the SO3 molecule and the product


formed is benzenesulfonic acid,
i Suggest which atom in the SO3 molecule accepts an electron pair in the mechanism of


sulfonation.
ii an equation in the style of part a i for the sulfonation of benzene to form


benzenesulfonic acid.
Discuss and sketch with a partner the mechanism of sulfonation in part b above. If you get stuck, work


with another group before displaying your suggested mechanism.


Alkylation (or acylation) of benzene (Friedel-Crafts reactions)
reactions, named after the chemists who first discovered them, are a third example of

electrophilic substitution into the benzene ring.
Sometimes chemists need to change the structure of an arene in order to make a new product. Examples



include the manufacture of detergents or the reactants needed to make plastics, such as
poly(phenylethene), commonly known as polystyrene. They can use a Friedel-Crafts reaction to substitute


a hydrogen in the benzene ring for an alkyl group, such as a methyl or an ethyl group:


CH2CH3


methylbenzene — ethylbenzene
The same type of reaction can also be used to introduce an acyl group into a benzene ring. An acyl group


contains an alkyl group and a carbonyl (C=O) group:
Q
3


phenylethanone


IMPORTANT


Friedel-Crafts reactions result in the introduction of a side-chain into a benzene ring.


 


Friedel-Crafts reactions are also called alkylation or acylation reactions.


For example:



heat
+ + HCl



catalyst


ethylbenzene
CH.



G
heat
+ + HCl



catalyst


phenylethanone
The mechanisms for Friedel-Crafts reactions involve attack on the benzene ring by an electrophile. In these


reactions, the electrophile carries a positive charge on a carbon atom, so there is attack by a carbocation.


The electrophile is formed by adding an aluminium chloride catalyst to:


to make an alkylbenzene, or


anacyl chloride, to make an acylbenzene.
This creates the carbocation electrophile to attack the benzene in the first step of the two mechanisms


below.


In alkylation
The alkylation of benzene, substituting an alkyl chain into the benzene ring, can be described by this three-


step mechanism:


Step 1:
H



——> +
|


H
The arrow between Cl and AICI3 represents a coordinate (dative covalent) bond.


The carbocation electrophile made then attacks the benzene ring:


Step 2:


The aluminium chloride catalyst is regenerated in the final step:


Step 3:


CH2CH3
H


+ + HCl +


Further alkylation of the benzene ring can take place as the reaction proceeds.


In acylation
The acylation of benzene, substituting an acyl group into the benzene ring, can be described by this three-


step mechanism:


Step 1:


H3C— +
chloride


Again, the electrophile made then attacks the benzene ring:


Step 2:


CH3



So


CH;
H
/
Then the aluminium chloride catalyst is regenerated in the final step:
Step 3:
CH3 CH3
——> +HCl+



H
CH;
CH;


Oxidation of the side-chain in arenes
The presence of the benzene ring in an alkylarene, such as methylbenzene, can affect the characteristic
reactions of its alkyl side-chain. For example, alkanes are not usually oxidised by a chemical oxidising


agent such as potassium manganate(Vil).
However, in alkylarenes, the alkane side-chain is oxidised to form a carboxylic acid. For example,
methylbenzene produces benzoic acid when refluxed with alkaline potassium manganate(VIl), and then


acidified with dilute sulfuric acid:


CH3 COOH


+ +


Hydrogenation
Unusually, the hydrogenation reaction is similar to an alkene’s reaction with hydrogen. The unsaturated
alkene becomes saturated as an alkane is formed. The reaction is carried out by heating the alkene with


hydrogen gas and a nickel or platinum catalyst.
The same reaction takes place with benzene. The benzene is hydrogenated and is converted to


cyclohexane. With methylbenzene, the product is methylcyclohexane:
O C


Ni or Pt
benzene cyclohexane

+ 3H heat


Ni or Pt


methylbenzene (CgHsCH3) cyclomethylbenzene


Question
4 a_ Copy and complete the two equations, which can be used to show the alkylation and acylation of
benzene to produce the mono-substituted products.


i + >
ii + > +
b i Name the mono-substituted organic product in part ai.


ii class of compound formed in part a ii.
is refluxed with alkaline potassium and then acidified with dilute


sulfuric acid. The same experiment is carried out but using hexane and the oxidising agent.
Compare what would happen in these experiments.
d i Give the reagents and conditions needed to convert benzene into cyclohexane.
ii type of reaction classifies the reaction in part d i?



condensation


D substitution


Discuss your reasoning with another learner.


REFLECTION


At this point, reflect on the work you have covered so far on benzene and its reactions. After looking


back, work with a partner to take turns asking each other short, quick questions.

Then discuss how you both feel about your progress so far in this chapter.



25.3 Phenol
Phenol, is a crystalline solid that melts at 43 °C. It is used to manufacture a wide range of


products (Figure 25.5). Its structure is:


 


Figure 25.5: Phenol and its derivatives are used to make a variety of consumer goods.


 
The melting point of phenol is relatively high for an aryl compound of its molecular mass because of
hydrogen bonding between its molecules. However, the large non-polar benzene ring makes phenol only


slightly soluble in water, as it disrupts hydrogen bonding with water molecules.
We can prepare phenol by reacting phenylamine, with acid, using ice to keep the
temperature below 10 °C. The reaction gives an unstable diazonium salt. We then warm the diazonium salt


in the aqueous solution to produce phenol. The equations are given below.


e Prepare acid (nitrous acid) in a test-tube, using sodium and dilute hydrochloric acid:
HNO, +NaCl


acid


Then add the phenylamine:


NCI
benzenediazonium


chloride
The diazonium salt formed is unstable and will decompose easily on warming with water, giving off


nitrogen gas,
+ + +


diazonium salt phenol


You can read more about diazonium salts and their use in the dye industry in Chapter 27.


The acidity of phenol


Phenol is weakly acidic, losing an H* ion from its hydroxyl group:


= (aq) + H* (aq)


phenol phenoxide ion


The position of this equilibrium lies well over to the left-hand side.
The strength of acids can be compared by looking at their pK, values. The values for phenol, water and
ethanol are shown in Table 25.3. Remember: the higher the value of the weaker the acid (see Section


Table 25.3: Comparing the acidity of phenol, water and ethanol.


 


 


IMPORTANT


Phenol is a stronger acid than water and ethanol. Ethanol is less acidic than phenol and water.


 
We can explain the order of acidity by looking at the conjugate bases formed on the right-hand side of the
equations in Table 25.3. The phenoxide ion, has its negative charge spread over the whole ion
as one of the lone pairs on the oxygen atom overlaps with the delocalised m bonding system in the benzene


ring.


phenoxide ion, ethoxide ion, with
with negative negative charge
charge spread over concentrated on


the whole ion the oxygen
This delocalisation reduces the charge density of the negative charge on the phenoxide ion compared with
or Therefore H*(aq) ions are not as strongly attracted to the phenoxide ion as they
are to hydroxide or ethoxide ions. This makes phenoxide ions less likely to re-form the undissociated phenol
molecules than hydroxide ions are to form water molecules, and ethoxide ions are to form ethanol


molecules.
Alternatively, we can explain the greater acidity of phenol by saying that phenol ionises to form a more
stable negative ion than water or ethanol, with its charge spread out. This stability means that the
ionisation of phenol is more likely to happen. This results in the position of equilibrium in the phenol
equation in Table 25.3 lying further to the right-hand side: so a higher proportion of phenol molecules


donate an ion than in the dissociation equations for water and ethanol.
Ethanol is a weaker acid than water because of the electron-donating alkyl (ethyl) group attached to the
oxygen atom in the ethoxide ion. This has the effect of concentrating more negative charge on this oxygen
atom, which more readily accepts an H* ion. This explains why the position of equilibrium lies further to the


left-hand side, favouring the undissociated ethanol molecules.
Question
5 your reasoning with another learner before writing your answers to parts a and b.
the following molecules in order of their acidity, starting with the most acidic:


CH3COOH

b you expect methanol to be more or less acidic than phenol?
Explain your answer.


c i Name the three reactants mixed to prepare a diazonium chloride salt.


the conditions used for the reaction in part i.


25.4 Reactions of phenol
We can divide the reactions of phenol into those involving the hydroxyl group, —OH, and those involving


substitution into the benzene ring.


Breaking of the O-H bond in phenol
Although phenol is only slightly soluble in water, it dissolves well in an alkaline solution. As you have just


learned, phenol is a weak acid so it will react with an alkali to give a salt plus water:


+NaOH ©- O-Na* +


The salt formed, sodium phenoxide, is soluble in water.


Molten phenol reacts vigorously with sodium metal, giving off hydrogen gas and again forming sodium
phenoxide:


OH + 2Na —>2 © +


Substitution into the benzene ring of phenol
Compared with benzene, phenol reacts more readily with electrophiles. The overlap of one of the lone pairs
of electrons on the oxygen atom in the —OH group with the bonding system increases the electron
density of the benzene ring in phenol. This makes phenol’s benzene ring more open to attack from
electron-deficient electrophiles than benzene itself. The electron-donating —OH group ‘activates’ the


benzene ring, directing substitution to positions 2, 4 and 6 (see Table 25.4, at the end of this chapter).


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 25.1


 


Bromination of phenol
Phenol undergoes similar reactions to benzene, but phenol does so under milder conditions. For
example, bromine water will not react with benzene at room temperature. To produce bromobenzene


we need pure bromine (not a solution) and an aluminium bromide catalyst.
However, bromine water reacts readily with phenol. Phenol decolorises the orange bromine solution


and forms a white precipitate of 2,4,6-tribromophenol (see Figure 25.6).
OH OH
Br. Br
+ + 3HBr

Br
Similar reactions happen between phenol and chlorine or iodine.


 


Figure 25.6: Bromine water is added to aqueous phenol from a dropper to form 2,4,6-tribromophenol.


 
This activation of the benzene ring is also shown in the nitration of phenol. With benzene, we need a
mixture of concentrated nitric acid and sulfuric acid to reflux with benzene between 25 °C and 60 °C


for nitration to take place (see Section 25.2).


However, the activated ring in phenol readily undergoes nitration with dilute nitric acid at room
temperature:
OH OH
dil. NO, ©
+


If we use concentrated nitric acid, we get 2,4,6-trinitrophenol formed, shown below:
OH


OH


NO,


 


A phenolic compound


1-Naphthol is a compound closely related to phenol:


OH


1-naphthol
The electron donating —OH group in 1-naphthol activates the benzene ring that it is bonded to. This makes


the ring more open to electrophilic substitution, directing attack to the 2 and/or 4 positions.


Question


6 Place these molecules in order of ease of nitration, with the most reactive first:



b i Write a balanced equation to show the reaction when excess chlorine is bubbled through


aqueous phenol at room temperature.
ii would the reaction conditions differ from those in part b i if you wanted to make


chlorobenzene from benzene and chlorine?
c the reactions of excess 1-naphthol with each of the following, and draw one of the organic


products formed in each case.
i potassium hydroxide solution
ii sodium metal
bromine water
dilute nitric acid
Compare your answers with a partner and discuss any differences. Then check against the
answers provided.


REFLECTION
Draw a mind map with ‘BENZENE’ at its centre to summarise what you have learned in Chapter


25, labelling links clearly. Swap your map with a partner and compare your efforts.


Discuss with a friend which, if any, parts of Chapter 25 that you need to:
e read through again to make sure you really understand all the new terms introduced in organic


chemistry

e seek more guidance on, even after going over it again yourself or with a friend.



 


 


 
The benzene molecule, is symmetrical, with a planar hexagonal shape.
Arenes have considerable energetic stability because of the six delocalised m bonding electrons that lie above and


below the plane of the benzene ring.
The main mechanism for the reactions of arenes is electrophilic substitution. This enables arenes to retain their
delocalised m electrons. Hydrogen atoms on the benzene ring may be replaced by a variety of other atoms or


groups, including halogen atoms and nitro groups, as well as alkyl or acyl groups in Friedel-Crafts reactions.
Despite the name ending in -ene, arenes do not usually behave like alkenes. Arenes typically undergo electrophilic


substitution, whereas alkenes undergo electrophilic addition.
Sometimes the presence of the benzene ring affects the usual reactions of its side-chain, e.g. methylbenzene is


oxidised by refluxing with alkaline potassium to form benzoic acid.


When the group is joined directly to a benzene ring, the resulting compound is called a phenol.
Phenols are weakly acidic, but are more acidic than water and alcohols. The acidity of phenol is due to


delocalisation of the negative charge on the phenoxide ion into the m bonding electron system on the benzene ring.
When reacted with sodium hydroxide, phenol forms a salt (sodium phenoxide) plus water. The reaction of sodium


metal with phenol produces sodium phenoxide and hydrogen gas.
The —OH group enhances the reactivity of the benzene ring towards electrophiles. The group is said to activate
the benzene ring. For example, bromine water is decolorised by phenol at room temperature, producing a white


precipitate of 2,4,6-tribromophenol.

Table 25.4 summarises the positions activated by different substituents in a benzene ring:
Substituent groups in the benzene ring that direct Substituent groups in the benzene ring that direct
the electrophile to attack the 2, 4 | th -coming electrophile to attack the 3 and / or 5
6 positions. These groups activate attack by positions. These groups de-activate attack by


electrophiles (because they tend to donate electrons | electrophiles (because they tend to withdraw


into the benzene ring). electrons from the benzene ring).
Table 25.4: Summary of positions attacked in electrophilic substitution into substituted benzene compounds, where R =


alkyl group.


 


 


 


 


 


Give the empirical formula of benzene. [1]


Give the molecular formula of benzene. [1]
c Draw the full displayed formula of the Kekulé structure of benzene, showing all


atoms and using double bonds and single bonds. [1]
Draw the skeletal formulae for the Kekulé and the delocalised structures of


benzene. [2]


[Total: 5]


Benzene reacts with bromine.
a balanced chemical equation for this reaction. [1]
b the catalyst used. [1]


c the visual observations you could make during the reaction. [2]


will also react with halogenoalkanes. This is called a Friedel-Crafts reaction.


i Using 1-chloropropane, write the formula of the catalyst needed to start the
reaction with benzene. [1]
ii Write the formula of the electrophile in this Friedel-Crafts reaction. [1]


the organic product of this reaction. [1]
There are three steps in the mechanism of this Friedel-Crafts reaction. Draw the
three steps in the mechanism to show the formation of the electrophile, the attack
on the benzene ring by the electrophile and the formation of the products of the

reaction (to include the regeneration of the catalyst). [4]


[Total: 11]
is an aryl compound.
Give the molecular formula of phenol. [1]


Give the empirical formula of phenol. [1]


b phenol reacts with sodium metal.


Give one observation and write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. [2]
Phenol reacts with sodium hydroxide solution.


Name the type of reaction and write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. [2]
d_ The reactions in parts b and c both give the same organic product.


Name this product. [1]


e Phenol reacts with bromine water.
Give the name of the product, two visual observations and a balanced chemical


equation. Then comment on how this shows that phenol is more reactive than benzene. [7]
f Contrast the molecules of phenol and benzene to explain why phenol is more reactive
than benzene. Your answer must include reference to the model used for the
arrangement of electrons. [4]
[Total: 18]

can be nitrated to give nitrobenzene.
the mechanism for this reaction. [2]


b species attacking benzene in the reaction is
How is generated in the reaction mixture? Name the substances used and give a


chemical reaction leading to the formation of [3]


suitable temperature for this reaction. [1]
curly arrows to draw the mechanism of how benzene reacts with to produce


nitrobenzene. [3]


structure of a common household substance is given below:
OH
H3C CH3
cl


the molecular formula of the compound. [1]
When bromine water is added to a solution of the compound, it is decolorised.


Suggest two structures for the product of the reaction. [2]


[Total: 12]
5 Describe the bonding in benzene. Include a description of the model used for the


arrangement of electrons in the molecule. [5]


decolorises bromine water whereas benzene has no effect on bromine


 
water.
Explain the difference in reactivity towards bromine water. [5]
[Total: 10]


SELF-EVALUATION


 


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
interpret, name and use the general, structural, displayed and
skeletal formulae of benzene and simple aryl compounds, and
describe and explain the shape of, and bond angles in,


benzene molecules in terms of o and bonds
describe the reactions of arenes, such as benzene and
methylbenzene, in substitution reactions with chlorine, and
also with bromine; nitration; Friedel-Crafts alkylation and
acylation; complete oxidation of the side-chain to give a
benzoic acid; hydrogenation of the benzene ring to form a


cyclohexane ring
describe the mechanism of electrophilic substitution in arenes
and the effect of the delocalisation of electrons in such


reactions
predict whether halogenation will occur in the side-chain or in


the benzene ring in arenes, depending on reaction conditions
apply knowledge of the ‘directing effect’ relating to position of
substitution in the electrophilic substitution of aryl


compounds, such as nitrobenzene and phenol (see Table 25.4)
describe the reactions (reagents and conditions) by which
phenol can be prepared and its reactions with bases, and with


Na(s)
describe the nitration, and the bromination, of phenol’s
aromatic ring and compare these reactions with those of


benzene
explain the acidity of phenol and the relative acidities of 25.3
water, phenol and ethanol
apply knowledge of the reactions of phenol to those of other 25.4

phenolic compounds, such as naphthol.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START


 


Working in your group, answer these questions:
with a partner which is the stronger acid: acid (HCIO) with a K, of 3.7 x 1078 mol
or hydrocyanic acid (HCN) with a K, of 4.9 x mol Then explain how the value


enables you to decide.
Using an arrowhead and the symbols for a partial negative charge and a partial positive charge,


add labels to both of the following bonding pairs of atoms: C=O, C-Cl


Which row in Table 26.1 correctly describes one use of a curly arrow in a mechanism?



Table 26.1


 


 
4 Which two processes take place in a condensation reaction?
followed by substitution
hydrolysis followed by addition
dehydration followed by elimination


D


addition followed by elimination


TRANS-FATTY ACIDS


 
In general, when we get carboxylic acids from the hydrolysis of oils or fats, they are called ‘fatty acids’.
They usually contain an even number of carbon atoms and form unbranched chains (Figure 26.1). For
example, octadecanoic acid contains 18 carbon atoms. Its structural formula is Its


skeletal formula is shown as:


Figure 26.1: The skeletal formula of a fatty acid.


 
We call fatty acids with one C=C double bond ‘monounsaturated’. We describe them as
‘polyunsaturated’ if they contain more than one C=C double bond. Each double bond will give rise to


cis/trans isomers (see Section 24.3).
Octadec-9-enoic acid is a common monounsaturated fatty acid we get from plant seeds. Its molecules
have eighteen carbon atoms and one C=C double bond. Figure 26.2 shows the skeletal formulae of its


cis- and trans-isomers.


fe)


OH


cis-octadec-9-enoic acid


trans-octadec-9-enoic acid


Figure 26.2: The cis- and trans-isomers of octadec-9-enoic acid.

 
You can see that the trans-isomer has straight chains whereas the cis-isomer is bent. This means that
the trans-fatty acids can pack together better and so have the higher melting points.



Trans-fatty acids are associated with health risks due to their use in foodstuffs, such as biscuits and
pastry. Plant oils are turned into ‘spreadable’ margarines by heating the oils with hydrogen using a
nickel or platinum catalyst. This addition reaction saturates some of the double bonds, straightening
out the chains in their molecules. The hydrogenation process also converts cis-isomers into trans-
isomers, which increases their melting points. Trans-fatty acids are particularly associated with fast


foods that are prepared by frying in these partially hydrogenated oils.
Researchers have found links between the amount of trans-fats consumed and an increased risk of
heart disease and strokes. The trans-fats appear to increase the amount of low-density lipoprotein
(LDLs) cholesterol (known as ‘bad’ cholesterol) and lowers the amount of high-density lipoproteins
(HDLs) the ‘good’ cholesterol associated with health benefits. Disturbing the balance in your blood
between LDLs and HDLs can result in arteries furring up and narrowing, causing circulatory problems.


This can result in high blood pressure, strokes and heart disease.
Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e why do the makers of margarines often use trans-fatty acids to make their products?


e how does consuming too much affect your body?


e how can we reduce our intake of foods containing trans-fatty acids?


 

26.1 The acidity of carboxylic acids
Carboxylic acids display the typical reactions of all acids due to the presence of excess H*(aq) ions in their
aqueous solutions (see Section 21.3). For example, they react with bases to form a salt and water. Their
salts are called carboxylates. The carboxylate salt formed by the reaction of ethanoic acid with sodium
hydroxide is called sodium ethanoate, Nat.
The carboxylic acids are weak acids. The majority of their molecules are undissociated in water.

For example:


CH;COOH(aq) = (aq) + (aq)


ethanoic acid ethanoate ion
The position of this equilibrium lies well over to the left-hand side. The dissociation constant, of


ethanoic acid at 25 °C is 1.7 x mol (see Section 21.3).


IMPORTANT


Remember that the smaller the value of K,, the weaker the acid.


The carboxylic acids are stronger acids than alcohols. This is explained by:


 


the O-H bond in the carboxylic acid is weakened by the carbonyl group, C=O.
electrons in the C—O bond


are drawn towards the C=O bond
electrons are drawn away
the bond



The carboxylate ion is stabilised by the delocalisation of electrons around the group. This
delocalisation spreads out the negative charge on the carboxylate ion, reducing its charge density. This
makes it less likely to bond with an H*(aq) ion to re-form the undissociated acid molecule with its


—COOH group.
fe) negative charge is spread over
the whole — group (the bond
lengths of both carbon-oxygen


bonds are equal)
As we have already seen in Section 25.3, phenol is a stronger acid than ethanol. However, phenol
= 1.0 x mol is a weaker acid than ethanoic acid, CH3COOH (K, = 1.7 x mol and


benzoic acid, CgH;COOH (K, = 6.3 X mol


IMPORTANT


 


Carboxylic acids are stronger acids than phenols, and phenols are stronger acids than alcohols.
We find that electron-withdrawing groups bonded to the carbon atom next to the -COOH group make the


acid stronger.


There are two reasons for this:


groups further weaken the O-H bond in the undissociated acid molecule
groups extend the delocalisation of the negative charge on the -COO™ group of
the carboxylate ion, further increasing the stabilisation of the group, and making it less likely to

bond with an H*(aq) ion.
Chlorine atoms are an example of an electron-withdrawing group. The dissociation constants of


ethanoic acid and its three chloro-substituted derivatives are shown in Table 26.2.


ethanoic acid, CH3COOH 1.7 x 1075
chloroethanoic acid, 1.3 x 1073
dichloroethanoic acid, 5.0 x 1072


trichloroethanoic acid,


Table 26.2: The larger the value of the stronger the acid.


 


 
Trichloroethanoic acid, has three strongly electronegative Cl atoms all withdrawing electrons
from the group, weakening the O-H bond more than the other acids in Table 26.2. Once the O-H
bond is broken, the resulting anion is also stabilised more effectively as the negative charge is further
spread out by its three electron-withdrawing Cl atoms, making it less attractive to H*(aq) ions. This makes


the the strongest of the acids listed in Table 26.2 as it has most Cl atoms (see Figure 26.3).


IMPORTANT
The more electron-withdrawing groups on the carbon atom bonded to the C atom in the -COOH group,


the stronger the acid.


 


 
H weakest acid
(K = 1.7 x mol

\
H O—H
cl
°
Y

\
H
cl
fe)


\
H
cl
fe)
4
cl<c—c strongest acid
y \ (K, x mol



this H is lost most easily
and the ion
formed is least attractive


to H*(aq) ions


Figure 26.3: The trend in the acid strength of ethanoic acid and its chloro-substituted derivatives.


 
Ethanoic acid is the weakest acid in Table 26.2, as the methyl group is electron donating. This has the


opposite effect to electron-withdrawing groups:

it strengthens the O-H bond in the acid’s -COOH group
it donates negative charge towards the group of the carboxylate ion, concentrating its negative

charge, and making it more likely to accept an H*(aq) ion.


Question


Working in a pair or a small group, discuss Question 1 below together before writing down your answers.


Place the following acids in order of strength, starting with the strongest acid.
CH3CHCICOOH

why ethanoic acid is a stronger acid than ethanol.
which would be the stronger acid: methanoic acid or ethanoic acid. Explain your
reasoning.


26.2 Oxidation of two carboxylic acids
You saw in Chapter 17 that primary alcohols can be oxidised by heating with acidified potassium
dichromate(VI) solution to form aldehydes and then further oxidation produces carboxylic acids (see


Section 18.2). The carboxylic acids prepared are not usually oxidised any further.
However, methanoic acid (HCOOH) is a stronger reducing agent than other carboxylic acids, so it can


undergo further oxidation (Figure 26.4).


Figure 26.4: The displayed formula of methanoic acid.


 
This involves the oxidising agent breaking down the methanoic acid molecule, forming carbon dioxide. This
oxidation can be carried out even by warming with mild oxidising agents, such as the Fehling’s or Tollens’


reagents used to distinguish between aldehydes and ketones (see Section 18.5).
In a positive test for an aldehyde, the ion in Fehling’s solution is reduced to the ion, which
precipitates out as red oxide. When methanoic acid is oxidised by Fehling’s solution, the same
positive test result is obtained. With Tollens’ reagent, the silver ion present, Ag*, is reduced to silver metal,


Ag, when it oxidises methanoic acid (also as in the positive test for an aldehyde).
The half-equation for the oxidation of methanoic acid can be written in terms of electron transfer to an
oxidising agent as:


HCOOH CO, + 2H* (aq) +
Oxidation no. +2 +4


of carbon:


 
or in terms of the addition of oxygen from an oxidising agent as:


HCOOH + > +
This oxidation of methanoic acid will also occur with stronger oxidising agents such as acidified solutions of
potassium (decolorising the purple solution) or potassium (turning the


orange solution green).
Another common example of a carboxylic acid that can be oxidised by these stronger oxidising agents is
ethanedioic acid (a dicarboxylic acid). Its molecular formula is Its structural formula is HOOCCOOH

or and its displayed formula is shown in Figure 26.5.




Figure 26.5: The displayed formula of ethanedioic acid.


 
A solution of ethanedioic acid (with sulfuric acid added) can be used in titrations to standardise a solution
of potassium manganate(VIl). As with methanoic acid, the oxidation results in the formation of carbon
dioxide and water. The solid ethanedioic acid can be weighed out accurately to make a standard solution of
known concentration. This is warmed in a conical flask and the potassium solution to be
standardised is run in from a burette. The end-point of the titration is identified when the addition of a drop
of the purple solution turns the solution pink. This happens when all the ethanedioic acid


has been oxidised.
The balanced ionic equation for this redox reaction is:


2MnO,~ + 6H* + > + 10CO, +
The ions formed catalyse the reaction. This is an example of autocatalysis, in which one of


the products of the reaction acts as a catalyst for that reaction.


Question


2 Carboxylic acids can be prepared by refluxing a primary alcohol with a strong oxidising agent.
Why is methanoic acid never prepared by refluxing methanol with acidified potassium


solution?


b back at the two half-equations for the oxidation of methanoic acid.


Write two similar equations representing the oxidation of ethanedioic acid.
c i In a titration between ethanedioic acid and potassium solutions, ethanedioic
acid is heated in its conical flask before adding the potassium solution from


the burette. Suggest why.
an experiment to standardise a solution of potassium 25.0 cm? of a
standard solution of 0.0500 mol ethanedioic acid was fully oxidised by a titre of 8.65


cm? of potassium manganate(VIl) solution.


Calculate the concentration of the potassium solution.


REFLECTION
This activity helps you to reflect on your understanding of redox reactions, half-equations and titration


calculations.
Discuss with a partner whether or not you both feel that you have a good understanding of redox
reactions, half-equations and titration calculations. Are you confident in all three areas or not? Think
about the skills and thought processes you need to master these areas. This will help you identify


where any problems lie.
If necessary, look back to Chapters 1, 7 and 24 to revise redox reactions, half-equations and titration
calculations. How will you use the skills and thought processes you discussed with your partner when

revising these chapters?



26.3 Acyl chlorides


Preparing acyl chlorides
An acy! chloride is similar in structure to a carboxylic acid but the hydroxyl group, has been replaced


by a Cl atom. The displayed formula of chloride is shown in Figure 26.6.


The structural formula of ethanoyl chloride is written as CH3COCI.

H
|

H—C—C


| \


H cl


chloride


Figure 26.6: Ethanoyl chloride is the acyl chloride derived from ethanoic acid.


 
We can prepare acyl chlorides from their corresponding carboxylic acid using solid phosphorus(V) chloride,


liquid chloride or liquid sulfur dichloride oxide
With phosphorus(V) chloride


CH3COOH + CH3COCI + + HCI


No special conditions are required for this reaction.
With chloride


3CH3COOH + > 3CH3COCI +


Heat is required for this reaction to take place.
With sulfur dichloride oxide
CH3COOH + + SO, + HCI


No special conditions are required for this reaction.
You can observe steamy white fumes when hydrogen chloride gas given off. The third reaction, with


is the one reaction to produce the acyl chloride as the only liquid product, as both SO, and HCI are gases.


Question
Write a balanced equation, using structural formulae for the organic compounds, and state any


conditions necessary, to show the formation of:
chloride from a suitable carboxylic acid and
chloride from a suitable carboxylic acid and PCl3


chloride from a suitable carboxylic acid and PCls.
Check your answers to Question 3 against those of another learner, making sure all your equations are


balanced, before looking at the answers provided.


Reactions of acyl chlorides
Many useful compounds can be synthesised from carboxylic acids. However, the synthetic reactions can be
difficult to carry out because carboxylic acids are relatively unreactive. One way round this is to first


convert the carboxylic acid into an acyl chloride. Acyl chlorides are much more reactive than carboxylic


acids.
As we saw in Section 18.2, an acyl chloride is similar in structure to a carboxylic acid, with the -OH group
replaced by a Cl atom. So the functional group becomes the —COCI group. The structural formula of
acyl chlorides can be written as ROCI, where R is an alkyl or aryl group. For example, propanoyl chloride


can be written as CH3CH2COCI.


The structural formulae of benzoic acid and its derivative chloride are shown in Figure 26.7.



derived from


benzoyl chloride benzoic acid


Figure 26.7: Benzoyl chloride is the acy! chloride derived from benzoic acid.


 
Acyl chlorides are reactive compounds. The carbon has electrons drawn away from it by the Cl
atom as well as by its O atom as both are strongly electronegative atoms. This gives the carbonyl carbon a
relatively large partial positive charge and makes it particularly open to attack from nucleophiles.
Remember that nucleophiles can donate a lone pair of electrons to an electron-deficient carbon atom in the


mechanism of a reaction.



The acyl chlorides are reactive liquids. When they react with nucleophiles the bond breaks and white


fumes of hydrogen chloride, HCl, are given off.


IMPORTANT


To generalise the reactions of acyl chlorides, we can write:


ROCI + HZ > ROZ + HCl


where HZ can be water, an alcohol, phenols, ammonia or an amine.


 
Note that HZ contains either an oxygen or nitrogen atom with a lone pair of electrons that can be donated.


HZ can therefore act as a nucleophile.
Also note that in the reactions with ammonia and amines, the gas formed reacts quickly with the
ammonia / amines to form salts. Ammonia will form primary amines form and
secondary amines form This means that you see far less of the white HCI fumes given off than


with water, alcohols or phenols.


Reaction with water
Figure 26.8 shows the mechanism of hydrolysis, showing the initial attack by a water molecule, acting as a


nucleophile, followed by the elimination of a molecule of hydrogen chloride.


 



CH3— + HCl


\


Figure 26.8: The condensation (addition-elimination) mechanism of hydrolysis of ethanoyl chloride.

 
The hydrolysis can be classified as a condensation reaction, as there is an initial addition reaction of water


across the C=O bond, followed by elimination of a small molecule, in this case HCI.
This reaction is far more vigorous than the hydrolysis of chloroalkanes (see Section 16.2). The hydrolysis of
chloroalkanes needs a strong alkali, such as aqueous sodium hydroxide, to be refluxed with the
chloroalkane to hydrolyse it. The nucleophile needed to hydrolyse a chloroalkane is the negatively charged


hydroxide ion,
However, a neutral water molecule is sufficient to hydrolyse an acyl chloride quickly at room temperature.
This difference is due to the carbon bonded to the chlorine atom in a chloroalkane not being as strongly 5+
as the carbon atom in an acyl chloride. Remember that in an acyl chloride, the carbon bonded to the
chlorine atom is also attached to an oxygen atom. So the carbonyl carbon has two strongly electronegative


atoms pulling electrons away from it. Therefore, the attack by the nucleophile is much more rapid.
Aryl chlorides or chloroarenes, such as chlorobenzene, will not undergo hydrolysis. The carbon
atom bonded directly to the chlorine atom is part of the delocalised m bonding system of the benzene ring.
A lone pair of electrons from the Cl atom tends to overlap with the delocalised p electrons in the benzene
ring. This causes the bond to have some double bond character, making it stronger and more difficult


to break, so hydrolysis does not occur.


IMPORTANT


The ease of hydrolysis, starting with the compounds most readily broken down, is:


acyl chloride > chloroalkane > aryl chloride or chloroarene


 
Question
4 reaction with a nucleophile, explain why an acyl chloride reacts faster than an alcohol.


b the products of the hydrolysis of chloride.
c i Place the following compounds in order of ease of hydrolysis, starting with the most


reactive.



ii Explain your answer to part i.


If a reaction occurs with water, what will you see in part i?


Reaction with alcohols and with phenol
When acyl chlorides react with alcohols and phenol they form esters (and HCl). The reactions happen more
quickly than the reactions of alcohols or phenol with carboxylic acids. The acyl chloride reactions also go to
completion and do not form an equilibrium mixture like the reactions with carboxylic acids. Therefore acyl


chlorides are useful in the synthesis of esters in the chemical industry.


Ethanoyl chloride will react vigorously with ethanol to form an ester:
fe)
4
+ ——> + HCl
cl
ethanoyl ethanol ethyl


chloride ethanoate


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 26.1
Hydrolysis of acyl chlorides


Water is a suitable nucleophile to attack an acyl chloride molecule.
A lone pair of electrons on the oxygen atom in a water molecule initiates the attack on the 6+ carbonyl
carbon atom. The reaction produces a carboxylic acid and hydrogen chloride gas. It is an example of a


hydrolysis reaction, i.e. the breakdown of a compound by water.


For example:


CH; + HCl


chloride propanoic acid
The acyl chloride can be added to water using a dropping pipette. The reaction is immediate and white


fumes of HCI are observed rising from the liquid.


 
With phenol, the reaction with an acyl chloride proceeds if warmed. There is no reaction between phenol
and carboxylic acids, so acyl chlorides must be used if you want to make phenyl esters. The reaction takes
place in the presence of a base. The initial reaction between phenol and the base creates the phenoxide


ion, The negatively charged phenoxide ion acts as the nucleophile to attack the carbonyl carbon in
the acyl chloride:
fe)
4 4
+ NaCl


cl
ethanoyl sodium phenyl
chloride phenoxide ethanoate
+ NaCl
fe) fe}
4

\
cl
benzoyl sodium phenyl


chloride phenoxide benzoate


Reaction with ammonia and amines
Ammonia (NH3) acts as the nucleophile in the usual nucleophilic addition-elimination reaction of acyl


chlorides. The concentrated ammonia is added at room temperature and the reaction is vigorous:


+ NH; CH;COOH, + HCl
ethanamide
followed by:


+ NH3 >
The organic product is an amide in which the Cl atom in the acyl chloride is replaced by an


group. The mechanism of the reaction with ammonia is shown in Figure 26.9:


 

addition elimination NH.
the C=O bond HCI



°


Figure 26.9: Mechanism of the nucleophilic addition-elimination of an acyl chloride with ammonia.


 
Primary amines can also act as nucleophiles as they contain nitrogen atoms with a lone pair of


electrons. This lone pair of electrons is available to attack the carbonyl carbon atom in acyl chlorides.


The reaction of an acyl chloride with an amine is vigorous and the organic product is a substituted amide.


For example, with a primary amine such as methylamine:
4
+ ——> +
cl NHCH3

N-methylethanamide
The mechanism of the nucleophilic condensation (addition-elimination) reactions of acyl chlorides with



amines follows the same steps as the hydrolysis with water in Figure 26.8 earlier in this section, and the
reaction with ammonia above (Figure 26.9). You can imagine the primary amine as an ammonia molecule


with one of its H atoms replaced by an alkyl group.


Look at Figure 26.10.

( 2
CH, elimination,


cl
Figure 26.10: The nucleophilic condensation (addition-elimination) mechanism of chloride reacting with a


primary amine.


 
With secondary amines such as dimethylamine, the reaction is similar:


fe) fe)
4
CH;C


cl N(CH3)2
In both the reactions with amines shown above, most of the HCl is not given off as white fumes. As with
ammonia, most of the HCI undergoes an acid-base reaction with unreacted amine to form a white organic


ammonium salt. With methylamine, we get and with dimethylamine is formed.
For example:


+ HCl >


base acid salt


Question
5 Using an acyl chloride as a starting compound in each case, name the reactants you would use to


make:
i ethyl ethanoate
ii butanoate
benzoate.


b and complete the following equation:


CH3CH,COCI + >


REFLECTION
Working with a partner, discuss the mechanism of nucleophilic addition-elimination in the reaction
between chloride and dimethylamine. Then try showing the mechanism using curly


arrows.
Now discuss which nuceophile you would expect to be most effective: ammonia, a primary amine


or a secondary amine. Think about the inductive effect of alkyl groups.
Talk together about how you go about drawing mechanisms and how they help to make sense of


organic reactions.


Discuss if there are any parts of Chapter 26 that you need to:


e read through again to make sure you really understand


e seek more guidance on, even after going over it again.


Use the checklist in the Summary to help you reflect.


SUMMARY
Carboxylic acids are weak acids. Their strength is increased if the carbon atom next to the —COOH group has


electron-withdrawing atoms, such as chlorine, bonded to it.


Acyl chlorides (RCOCI) are made by reacting carboxylic acids with PCls, PCl3 or
Acyl chlorides react with amines to give substituted amides. Acyl chlorides are more reactive than their


corresponding carboxylic acids.
Acyl chlorides are reactive liquids. They are easily hydrolysed by water, forming a carboxylic acid while giving off


white fumes of hydrogen chloride.
Acyl chlorides also react with alcohols and phenols to give esters.


The ease of hydrolysis of chloro compounds is largely determined by the size of the partial positive charge on the
carbon in the bond and its strength. So acyl chlorides are more reactive with water than chlorides

(halogenoalkanes), which are more reactive the hydrolysis-resistant aryl chlorides (halogenoarenes).



EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


chlorides and carboxylic acids can both be used to prepare esters.


Give the reagents and conditions required to make ethyl ethanoate directly from a
carboxylic acid. [3]
ii Write an equation to show the formation of ethanoate in part a i. [1]
b Give the reagents and conditions required to make benzoate from an acyl
chloride. [3]
ii Write an equation to show the formation of phenyl benzoate in part b i. [1]


iii Describe what you see happen in this reaction. [1]
c Describe two advantages that acy! chlorides have over carboxylic acids in the


preparation of esters in industry. [2]

[Total: 11]
2 Draw the displayed formula of chloride. [1]

b Give the name and formula of a reagent that can be used to prepare butanoyl

chloride from butanoic acid. [2]

ii Write a balanced equation for the reaction in part b i. [1]


iii Butanoic acid is a weaker acid than 2-chlorobutanoic acid. Explain why. [2]


the skeletal formula of 2-chlorobutanoic acid. [1]
Name butanoic acid that is a stronger acid than 2-


chlorobutanoic acid. [1]
Explain the relative ease of hydrolysis for the compounds chlorobenzene, butanoyl


chloride, and 1-chlorobutane. [4]


[Total: 12]
SELF-EVALUATION


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to

Ican section... more work there move on


explain the relative acidity of carboxylic acids and of chlorine-
26.1
substituted ethanoic acids
describe how some carboxylic acids, such as methanoic acid 26.2
and ethanedioic acid, can be further oxidised
describe the reactions of carboxylic acids in the preparation of 263
acyl chlorides
describe the reactions of acyl chlorides with alcohols, phenols, 263


ammonia and primary or secondary amines
describe the condensation (addition-elimination) mechanism


for the reactions of acyl chlorides
explain the relative ease of hydrolysis of acyl chlorides, alkyl

chlorides and halogenoarenes (aryl chlorides).



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Working in your group, answer these questions:
Which one of the following is the best definition of a Bransted-Lowry base?
proton acceptor
H* donor
lone pair acceptor
electrophile
Which one of the following best describes the inductive effect of an alkyl group?
proton accepting
proton donating
electron accepting
electron donating
Discuss with a partner what effect:
ethyl group has on the benzene ring in ethylbenzene
the nitro group has on the benzene ring in nitrobenzene.
Which one of the following reactions can be classified as ‘hydrolysis’?


+ NaOH > + NaBr


+
+


CH3COCH3 + 2[H] CH3CHOHCH3


 


COLOURFUL CHEMISTRY
In 1856 William Henry Perkin was only 18 years old when he made a remarkable discovery - by
accident! William was studying chemistry and was given the task of making quinine, a drug used to
treat malaria. After one of his experiments with coal tar, his beaker was filled with a black sticky mess.
Another failure, he assumed. However, when he tried to wash the beaker with alcohol, he found that


the gooey mess dissolved to form a beautiful, rich purple-coloured solution.
Instead of disposing of the solution, he was so thrilled with the colour that he decided to dye a piece of
silk with it. When the silk was dry he found that the dye did not wash out in water, and the colour did


not fade in sunlight. Perkin had made the first synthetic dye.
After that he formed a company to market the new dye and continued his research to make more new


colours of dye.

Figure 27.1 shows what the main structure in the dye was later found to be.
Now we have thousands of synthetic dyes to choose from and the vast majority contain nitrogen
atoms, like the original synthetic dye. You can read more about ‘azo dyes’ and how we can prepare
them in Section 27.2. Figure 27.2 shows a few examples of azo dyes.


Figure 27.1: The skeletal formula of the main compound in William Perkin’s original synthetic dye (mauve).


 
Questions for discussion
Working with another learner or group of learners:


e Discuss the role of chance in scientific discoveries.
e Carry out some research to find two more examples where chemical discoveries were made by


chance.
e Look at the azo dyes in Figure 27.2. Which group of atoms in the azo dyes, besides the benzene


rings, are found in all the structures?


yell


 


 
OH
N=N
HO N=N N=N


green azo dye
OH OH
N=N



NHCONH



red azo dye


Figure 27.2: The structures of differently coloured azo dyes.


 


 


27.1 Amines


Classes of amines


There are three classes of amine: primary, secondary and tertiary.


IMPORTANT
Primary amines have an group bonded to an alkyl or aryl group, e.g. ethylamine, (Figure


27.3), or phenylamine,


 
Note that some primary amines do not have the group at the end of an alkyl chain. We indicate the
position of the group on the hydrocarbon chain by numbering from the nearest end of the molecule.
In these cases we refer to the group as the ‘amino’ group, e.g. is called 3-


aminohexane.
H H H


|
4 HH

methylamine ethylamine
H H H
A


HHH 4H



propylamine


Figure 27.3: The displayed formulae and structural formulae of three primary amines.


 


IMPORTANT
Secondary amines have two alkyl or aryl groups attached to an >NH group, e.g. dimethylamine,


 


Look at the first formula in Figure 27.4. This shows dimethylamine, a secondary amine.
H H H H
| | | |
H—C—N—C—H H—C—N—C—H
| |
H H H H
or
dimethylamine H


(a secondary amine)
trimethylamine


(a tertiary amine)


Figure 27.4: A secondary amine and a tertiary amine.


 
Tertiary amines have three alkyl or aryl groups attached to the same nitrogen atom, e.g. trimethylamine,
(CH3)3N (shown in Figure 27.4). However, at this level, we will only be looking at the reactions of primary

and secondary amines.
The basicity of amines



We can think of the amines as substituted ammonia (NH3) molecules. For example, a primary amine is an
ammonia molecule with one of its H atoms replaced by an alkyl or aryl group. Ammonia and the amines act
as bases because of the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom. Remember that a base is a proton (H*


ion) acceptor. The nitrogen atom donates its lone pair to an Ht ion, forming a co-ordinate (dative) bond.
For ammonia:
NH3 + H* >
For a primary amine:
+ H* > RNH3*
Dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with ammonia and with amines to produce salts.
For ammonia:
NH3 + HCI >
ammonium chloride
For a primary amine:
+ HCI


methylammonium chloride


Ammonia and the amines have different strengths as bases.


IMPORTANT
The strength of ammonia and amines as bases depends on the availability of the lone pair of electrons


on their N atom to bond with an Ht ion.


ethylamine > ammonia phenylamine
STRONGEST WEAKEST



BASE BASE


 
Let us consider ammonia, ethylamine and phenylamine as examples. We find that the strongest base of


the three is ethylamine, followed by ammonia and, finally, phenylamine.
Ethylamine is a stronger base than ammonia because the group is electron-donating: it has a positive
inductive effect (see Figure 27.5). By releasing electrons to the N atom, the ethyl group makes the lone pair
more readily available to bond with an Ht ion than it is in ammonia. Ammonia just has three H atoms


bonded to the N atom, and no alkyl groups.


alkyl groups are
electron-donating
(or electron-releasing)



CH3CH2 NH2


Figure 27.5: Ethylamine is a stronger base than ammonia.


 
However, ammonia is a stronger base than phenylamine because one of the p orbitals on the nitrogen
atom in phenylamine overlaps with the m bonding system in the benzene ring. This causes the lone pair of
the N atom in phenylamine to be delocalised into the benzene ring. This then makes the lone pair less


available to form a co-ordinate (dative) bond with an Ht ion than it is in ammonia (see Figure 27.6).


nitrogen’s lone pair gets
H. drawn in to the delocalised
ring of electrons
|


H


Figure 27.6: Phenylamine is a very weak base.

 


Question
Name the following compounds:
i



and predict whether diethylamine is a stronger or weaker base than ethylamine. Explain
your reasoning.


27.2 Formation of amines
Chapter 16 you learned how bromoethane undergoes nucleophilic substitution with ammonia to form
a mixture of amines. In order to prepare ethylamine (while avoiding the formation of secondary and


tertiary amines we use excess hot ethanolic ammonia under pressure:


CH;CH,Br + NH; > + HBr


ethylamine
Hydrogen bromide, HBr, which could react with the ethylamine, is removed by the excess ammonia. It
forms ammonium bromide, The excess ammonia also reduces the chances of bromoethane


being attacked by ethylamine, as ethylamine is also a nucleophile.
However, if your aim is to prepare a secondary amine, we can start with a halogenoalkane and a


primary amine and react them, again in ethanol, heated in a sealed tube, under pressure. For example:


+ > (CH3CH2)2NH + HBr


The secondary amine formed in this example is named diethylamine.
2 learned in Chapter 16 about the formation of nitriles by reacting a halogenoalkane with the
ion. To carry out the reaction, a solution of potassium cyanide, KCN, in ethanol is heated under reflux


with the halogenoalkane:
2


bromomethane ethanenitrile
Note that we start with bromomethane, not bromoethane, as the cyanide group adds a carbon atom to


the alkyl group.


We can then reduce (add hydrogen to) the ethanenitrile to make ethylamine.
The nitrile vapour and hydrogen gas are passed over a nickel catalyst, or LiAIH, (lithium


tetrahydridoaluminate) in dry ether can be used for the reduction:
+ 4[H] >


ethylamine
3 also use LiAIH, in dry ether to reduce amides to amines.


So the carbonyl group, >C=O, in the ethanamide will be reduced to ethylamine:
+ 4[H] — CH;CH,NH,


ethanamide ethylamine


Preparing phenylamine
Phenylamine is made by reducing nitrobenzene. This reduction is carried out by heating nitrobenzene
under reflux with tin (Sn) and concentrated hydrochloric acid. The organic product in the acidic reaction
mixture is the ion which is then converted to phenylamine, by adding sodium


hydroxide solution. The reduction can be summarised as:


©- + ©- NH


The phenylamine is separated from the reaction mixture by steam distillation (Figure 27.7).


 
Figure 27.7: Steam generated in the conical flask is passed into the reaction mixture in the pear-shaped flask and


phenylamine is distilled off and collected.


 
Question
2 a i Give the reagents and conditions needed to make butylamine from butanenitrile.
ii bromoalkane that can be used to make the butanenitrile in part a i.
iii Name two types of organic compound that can be reduced by LiAIH, to form an alkylamine.


b i Give the name and structural formula of the arylamine formed when 2-nitrophenol reacts


with tin and concentrated hydrochloric acid.


ii State the type of reaction 2-nitrophenol undergoes in part b i.
Now share your answers to Question 2 with another learner and discuss any differences before


checking against the answers provided.


Reactions of phenylamine


Phenylamine with aqueous bromine
The reaction of aqueous bromine with phenylamine is similar to the reaction of aqueous bromine with
phenol (see Section 25.4): a white precipitate is formed. The nitrogen in the group in phenylamine
has a lone pair of electrons that can be delocalised into the benzene ring so that the bonding system
extends to include the C-N bond. The extra electron density in the benzene ring makes it more readily
attacked by electrophiles. Remember that the 2, 4 and 6 positions around the benzene ring are activated


when electron-donating groups, such as or —OH, are attached to the ring:
NH2
Br. Br


+ —— + 3HBr
Br


2,4,6-tribromophenylamine


Using phenylamine to make dyes


Phenylamine is an important compound in the synthesis of dyes.


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 27.1


 

Making an azo dye
The first step in making an azo dye is the reaction between phenylamine and acid (nitrous


acid), to give a diazonium salt.
acid is unstable, so it has to be made in the test-tube. Then the phenylamine is added. We
can make the acid using sodium (sodium nitrite), NaNO2, and dilute hydrochloric


acid:
NaNO, + HCl > HNO, + NaCl


acid


The first step in the synthesis of a dye is the production of benzenediazonium chloride:


HNO, +
benzenediazonium


chloride
Note that the positive charge on the diazonium ion is on the nitrogen atom bonded to the


benzene ring, shown with four bonds in the equation above.
In the second step, the diazonium ion reacts with an alkaline solution of phenol in a coupling


reaction:


+


an azo dye


 
Figure 27.8: The azo dye (also called a diazonium dye) forms in a coupling reaction between the diazonium ion and


an alkaline solution of phenol.


 


 


Explaining the steps in making an azo dye


Step 1: The reaction between nitrous acid and phenylamine is called diazotisation.


N+2H,O


diazonium ion
The reaction mixture must be kept below 10 °C using ice. This is because the diazonium ion is unstable and


will decompose easily, giving off nitrogen gas, at higher temperatures.
Step 2: In the coupling reaction, the positively charged diazonium ion acts as an electrophile. It substitutes


into the benzene ring of phenol at the 4 position, directly opposite the -OH group.
N+
phenol


+


the azo group


The orange dye formed is called an azo dye, or diazonium dye.
Its delocalised m bonding system extends between the two benzene rings through the azo group,
which acts like a bridge between the two rings. This makes the azo dye, called 4-
hydroxyphenylazobenzene, very stable (an important characteristic of a good dye). The azo dye forms
immediately on addition of the alkaline solution of phenol to the solution containing the diazonium ion


(Figure 27.8).
By using alternative aryl compounds to phenol, such as we can make a range of brightly


coloured dyes. For example, Figure 27.9 shows a molecule of a compound used as a yellow dye.


N=
Figure 27.9: A molecule of a yellow azo dye. Instead of phenol, CgHs5OH, the reactant used in the coupling reaction is


 


Question
3 a i Discuss which would be more readily attacked by an electrophile: benzene or phenylamine.


Then write an explanation of your answer.
ii a general equation to show the equation for the reaction of phenylamine with excess


of an electrophile, represented as Xt.
b i Explain why the reaction of phenylamine to make the diazonium ion is carried out below 10



ii Write a balanced equation to show how acid (nitrous acid) is made for the reaction


in part b i to take place.
iii Show the two steps that would be used to make the yellow dye shown in Figure 27.9,

starting from phenylamine.
Discuss with another learner how you both tackled Question 3.




27.3 Amino acids

Amino acids are an important group of compounds that all contain:

the basic amino group and


e the acidic carboxylic acid group (-COOH).


This makes the amino acids amphoteric, as they can behave as both an acid and a base.
One type of amino acid has the group bonded to the carbon atom next to the -COOH group. These 2-
aminocarboxylic acids are the ‘building blocks’ that make up proteins. There are about 20 of these


naturally occurring amino acids.
The general structure of an amino acid (2-aminocarboxylic acid) molecule is shown in Figure 27.10.
NH,
|
R—C—H
|


COOH


Figure 27.10: The general structure of an amino acid (a 2-aminocarboxylic acid).


 


The general structural formula of an amino acid (2-aminocarboxylic acid) is
The R group is the part of the amino acid that can vary in different amino acids. The simplest amino acid is

glycine (systematic name aminoethanoic acid) in which R is an H atom:

|
H—C—H


COOH


glycine (aminoethanoic acid)
Alanine (systematic name 2-aminopropanoic acid) is an amino acid in which the R group is the methyl


group, —CH3.


The R group can be:
acidic (e.g. it contains another carboxylic acid group, -COOH group),


basic (e.g. it contains another amine group, —NH> group), or


neutral (e.g. when R is an alkyl group).


Reactions of amino acids
Amino acids will undergo most reactions of amines and carboxylic acids. However, each molecule can


interact within itself due to its basic group and its acidic -COOH group:

H


COOH coo
The ion is called a zwitterion (from the German ‘zwei’ meaning ‘two’) as it carries two charges: one positive
and one negative The ionic nature of the zwitterions gives amino acids relatively strong


intermolecular forces of attraction. They are crystalline solids that are soluble in water.
A solution of amino acids in water contains zwitterions that have both acidic and basic properties (i.e. they
are amphoteric). They will resist changes in pH when small amounts of acid or alkali are added to them.


Solutions that do this are called buffer solutions (see Section 21.4).
If the pH is lowered by adding acid, the part of the zwitterion will accept an ion, re-forming the


undissociated group. This leaves a positively charged ion:
NH3 NH3
|
R—C—H + Ht R—C—H
| |


coo COOH
If the pH is raised by adding a base, the part of the zwitterion will donate an Ht ion to the hydroxide


ion + > re-forming the amine group. This leaves a negatively charged ion:


 
| |
R H+OH —> R


coo coo
By adjusting the pH by small amounts, we can reach a point where neither the positive nor negative ions
shown above dominate, so the amino acid has no charge overall. This pH is called the isoelectric point of


an amino acid.
The isoelectric point can be found by measuring the pH value of the amino acid solution when it is not


attracted to either a positive electrode or a negative electrode (see ‘Electrophoresis’ in Section 27.6).
Question
4 a i Which one of these general formulae represents amino acids, such as alanine and valine?

B



D


ii why all amino acids are solids at 20 °C.
b i Draw the displayed formula of the 2-aminocarboxylic acid called serine, in which the R group


is
ii the structure of the zwitterion of serine.
Draw the structure of the ion of serine present in acidic conditions.

the structure of the ion of serine present in alkaline conditions.
with a partner what we mean by the point of serine.


27.4 Peptides
Amino acid molecules can also react with each other. The acidic -COOH group in one animo acid molecule
reacts with the basic group in another molecule. When two amino acids react together, the resulting


molecule is called a dipeptide.




+ COOH


 
R R


atoms lost to form water
peptide link


+
H
a dipeptide

R |



Note that the shaded area is the amide bond between the two amino acids. An amide bond between two
amino acid molecules is also called a peptide bond or peptide link. The reaction is a condensation reaction,


as a small molecule, in this case water, is eliminated when the reactant molecules join together.


You can see that the dipeptide product still has an amine group, at one end and a carboxylic acid
group, —COOH, at the other end. Therefore the reaction can continue, to form a tripeptide initially, and
then ever-longer chains of amino acids. The longer molecules are known as polypeptides, and then proteins


as they become even longer sequences of amino acids (see Chapter 28).
Question


5 groups in the amino acids alanine and valine are -CH3 and respectively.


the structures of both these amino acids.


an equation to show the formation of a dipeptide made from alanine and valine.


27.5 Reactions of the amides
The amide group is represented in structural formulae by For example, ethanamide can be shown


as


Its displayed formula is:

|


H
H


ethanamide
Unlike the basic amines that you learned about at the start of this chapter, the amides are neutral
compounds. The presence of the electron-withdrawing oxygen atom in the amide group means that the
lone pair on the nitrogen atom of an amide is not available to donate to electron-deficient species, such as


ions.


Preparing an amide
The acyl chlorides are more reactive compounds than the carboxylic acids they are made from (see Section

26.3) and they are used for synthesising other useful compounds, such as amides.
Ethanamide can be made by reacting chloride with concentrated ammonia solution:


CH3COCI + NH3 + HCl
A primary amine, such as ethylamine, reacts with an acyl chloride to produce a substituted amide:


+ C3H7CONHC>Hs + HCl
Both these reactions occur at room temperature, releasing white fumes of hydrogen chloride as soon as
the reactants are added together. If there is an excess of the amine, it will react with the HCI formed to


make its salt. For example, in the previous reaction ethylamine will form ethylammonium chloride,



The italic letter N is used in naming substituted amides to denote which alkyl (or aryl) group or groups are
bonded to the nitrogen atom. For example, in the ethyl group
has replaced an H atom in the amide group. If the H atom on the nitrogen in this molecule is replaced by
another alkyl or aryl group, two Ns are used in the name, e.g. is called N,N-


Hydrolysis of amides
The characteristic group in substituted amides links the two hydrocarbon sections of their
molecules together. This amide link can be broken by hydrolysis with an acid or an alkali. The amide is


refluxed with, for example, hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide solution, to hydrolyse it:
RICOOH +
H*



NHR2


 


+

alkali
The products of hydrolysis of a substituted amide with acid are a carboxylic acid and a primary
amine The amine formed will react with excess acid in the reaction vessel to make its ammonium


salt, e.g. with excess hydrochloric acid.
With an alkali, such as aqueous sodium hydroxide, the products are the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid


and the primary amine
If we reflux an unsubstituted amide with acid, the products are the corresponding carboxylic acid
and ammonia. The ammonia in solution reacts with excess acid to make an ammonium salt. With an alkali,


the products are the salt of the carboxylic acid and ammonia.
Question
6 Write an equation to show the formation of the following compounds using an acid chloride:
i propanamide
ii


b an equation to show the hydrolysis of:


i butanamide by refluxing with dilute hydrochloric acid


ii by refluxing with aqueous sodium hydroxide.
Compare your answers to Question 6 with those of another learner, and discuss any differences before


you check against the answers provided.


27.6 Electrophoresis


How electrophoresis works
Electrophoresis is used extensively in biochemical analysis. It can be used to separate, identify and purify


proteins. We can use it with the amino acids and peptides obtained when a protein is hydrolysed.


The analytical technique of electrophoresis is based on separating ions placed in an electric field.


IMPORTANT


If a sample is placed between two oppositely charged electrodes:


positively charged ions will move towards the negatively charged electrode


negatively charged ions will move towards the positively charged electrode.


 
The sample is placed on absorbent paper or a gel supported on a glass plate. A buffer solution carries the


ions along.
The rate at which the ions move towards the oppositely charged electrode depends, among other things,
on the size and charge on the ions. Larger ions will move more slowly; highly charged ions will move more


quickly.
Therefore the ions are separated as the electric field is applied. You get a series of lines or bands on the
paper or gel once a locating agent is applied. Sometimes ultraviolet light is used to show the bands up. The


series of bands is called an electropherogram (Figure 27.11).




|


Let us consider a simple example of how a mixture of three amino acids undergoes separation. Amino acid
A could have a side-chain that is positively charged in a certain buffer solution, amino acid B could be


neutral and amino acid C could be negatively charged (Figure 27.12).


   

Figure 27.11: Comparing electropherograms.




top view side view




  

gel
B
a well is cut out


of the gel to
a hold the sample


mixture


Figure 27.12: The principle of gel electrophoresis.


 


At a pH of 7, the amino acid species present in samples of A, B and C are shown in Figure 27.13.
The chemical structures in Figure 27.13 show why we need to control the pH with a buffer solution in
electrophoresis. In Section 27.3, we saw how amino acids react in acidic and alkaline conditions to form
ions. The charge on the ions depends on the pH. Therefore pH will affect the movement of ions during


electrophoresis.
When separating a mixture of proteins, they are usually first treated with a chemical that makes them all
negatively charged. A dye can also be added. All the proteins then migrate in the same direction towards


the positive electrode, but larger proteins move more slowly.
B
fe)
+ 4 + 4 + 4

| | = |
° °




lysine glycine glutamic acid


Figure 27.13: The charge on amino acids depends on the pH of the solution.


 


Question


7 of three amino acids is separated by gel electrophoresis.


The three amino acids are glycine, valine and phenylalanine (Figure 27.14):
COOH COOH


|
H CHCH3
|
CH3


glycine (Gly) valine (Val)
COOH
|


phenylalanine (Phe)


Figure 27.14: Three amino acids to be separated by electrophoresis.


 
The electrophoresis is carried out in a buffer solution of pH 10. Draw the ions present in these


alkaline conditions.
b i Draw a sketch of the electropherogram you would expect (viewed from above), labelling the


amino acids as Gly, Val and Phe.
ii Explain your answer to part bi.


acid at its isoelectric point is placed between the positive and negative electrodes and


a voltage is applied. Describe the movement of the amino acid.
REFLECTION


Work as a pair to:
e explain how we can make an azo dye from phenylamine


assess each other’s understanding of the steps involved.
Look at the displayed formulae of the amino acids shown in this chapter. Choose three examples


and show the displayed formula of a tripeptide they could form together.
Reflect on your progress in Chapter 27: decide which aspects have you found most interesting /
most difficult / most enjoyable. Then discuss with your partner the reasons for your choices, and

assess your overall progress.



 


Primary amines contain the group.
Ethylamine is prepared either by reducing ethanenitrile, e.g. with hydrogen gas using a nickel catalyst, or by

treating bromoethane with an excess of hot, ethanolic ammonia.
Phenylamine is prepared by reducing nitrobenzene using tin and concentrated hydrochloric acid, then adding NaOH
Like ammonia, amines behave as bases. Because of the lone pair of electrons on their nitrogen atom, they can


readily accept protons ions), reacting to form salts.


Ethylamine is a stronger base than ammonia because of the electron-releasing ethyl group.
Phenylamine is a weaker base than ammonia because the lone pair on the N atom of phenylamine is delocalised


into the benzene ring.
Phenylamine reacts with acid (nitrous acid) below 10 °C, to form benzenediazonium chloride and water;


this reaction is called diazotisation.
Diazonium salts react with other aryl compounds (such as phenol) to form dyes; this is known as a coupling


reaction. Diazonium dyes are commercially important.
The stability of diazonium dyes arises from the extensively delocalised m bonding electron system that covers their


benzene rings and the azo bridge between them.
Amino acids (2-aminocarboxylic acids) have the general formula RCH(NH2)COOH, where R may be H, CH3 or another


organic group.
The amino group of an amino acid interacts with the acid group to form a zwitterion.


Amino acids react with both acids and bases to form salts.
The isoelectric point of an amino acid is the pH value at which there is no overall charge on that amino acid in its


aqueous solution.
Two amino acids react together in a condensation reaction, bonding together by an amide (peptide) bond to form a
dipeptide and water. Three amino acids form a tripeptide, and repetition of this condensation reaction many times


leads to the formation of polypeptides and proteins.


Amides are prepared by reacting acyl chlorides with ammonia or amines.
Amides can be hydrolysed by aqueous alkali or acid. With aqueous alkali the products are the salt of a carboxylic


acid and a primary amine. With acid hydrolysis the products are a carboxylic acid and a primary amine.
Electrophoresis uses an electric field to separate ions in a mixture. It is used widely in analysing the sequence of


amino acids in proteins.


 


 


 


 

and phenylamine are two organic nitrogen compounds. Both compounds are basic.
Draw the displayed formula of each compound, including lone pairs. [2]


b a balanced symbol equation for the reaction between one of these compounds and
an acid to form a salt. [2]

the structural feature of each compound that accounts for the basicity. [1]


[Total: 5]
2 can be made using nitrobenzene as starting material.
this type of reaction. [1]


Give the reagents that are used to bring about this change. [2]
Write a balanced symbol equation for this reaction. The conventions [O] or [H] may be


used if necessary. [2]


[Total: 5]


reacts with acid (nitrous acid) to form a diazonium salt.
which two reagents you would use to prepare the acid. [2]
the essential conditions for the reaction. [1]
the displayed formula of the diazonium salt. [3]


d a balanced symbol equation for this reaction. [2]


[Total: 8]
diazonium salt formed in Question 3 reacts with phenol to form a useful substance,


x.
Give the essential conditions for the reaction. [2]
Give the displayed formula of X. [2]
Write a balanced symbol equation for this change. [1]


d Suggest a possible use for X. [1]


[Total: 6]
5 formulae of two amino acids, glycine (Gly) and alanine (Ala), are given here: glycine


is and alanine is
aii Give the systematic names of both amino acids. [2]
ii Draw their skeletal formulae. [2]


Alanine can exist as two stereoisomers.
i Draw these two stereoisomers, showing how they differ in their spatial


arrangements. [2]
ii Explain why glycine does not have stereoisomers. [2]


[Total: 8]
6 glycine and alanine are amphoteric.

the term amphoteric. [1]
Explain the structural features of both glycine and alanine that enable them to be
amphoteric. [4]



Amino acids form zwitterions. Using glycine as an example, explain the term


zwitterion. [1]
ii and explain two physical properties of amino acids that can be explained by


the existence of zwitterions. [4]
Draw the two different dipeptides that can be formed when alanine and glycine react


together through a condensation reaction. [4]


[Total: 14]


7 structure of a certain tripeptide is shown here:
H
| y

| | |
H H OH
|


H
aii Draw the displayed formulae of the three amino acids that make up the tripeptide. [3]


which of these amino acids has two chiral carbon atoms. [1]
tripeptide can be split up into the three amino acids by refluxing with aqueous


hydrochloric acid.


bond is broken in this reaction? [1]


ii This reaction can be described as hydrolysis.
Suggest why, using a diagram. [3]
the method commonly used to separate mixtures of amino acids. [1]


Explain how the method to separate amino acids works. [5]


[Total: 14]


SELF-EVALUATION


 


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


Ican section... more work there move on


describe the formation of alkyl amines and phenylamine
describe and explain the basicity of amines, and the relative

basicities of ammonia, ethylamine and phenylamine


describe the reaction of phenylamine with aqueous bromine,
and with acid to give the diazonium salt and water, 27.2
followed by the coupling of benzenediazonium chloride and


phenol to make a dye
identify the azo group and describe the formation of other azo

dyes

describe the formation of amides from the reaction between

and R2COCI, and the hydrolysis of amides by aqueous


alkali or acid


explain why amides are weaker bases than amines
describe the acid / base properties of amino acids and the


formation of zwitterions, including the isoelectric point
describe the formation of amide (peptide bonds) between
amino acids to give di- and tripeptides
describe simply the process of electrophoresis and the effect
27.6

of pH, using peptides and amino acids as examples.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Working in your group, answer these questions:


Give the structural formula of:


but-2-ene
a


acid
2-aminopropanoic acid
phenylamine
propanoyl chloride.


Write an equation to represent the polymerisation of ethene,
Copy and complete this equation to show the polymerisation of 2-chloro-1,3-butadiene, a synthetic


rubber. Use square brackets around the polymer’s repeat unit:



where n is a very large number.
Here is a section of an addition polymer:


H

| | |


H


 


Draw the displayed formula of its monomer.


CONDUCTING POLYMERS


 
Most polymers are electrical insulators, which makes them very useful for making the casings of plugs,
sockets and light switches. However, a group of polymers have been developed that can conduct
electricity. One of the first was the poly(alkyne) polymer formed from the hydrocarbon called ethyne
(also still known by its old name, acetylene). The molecular formula of this monomer is and its


displayed formula is:



We can represent the formation of poly(ethyne) from its ethyne monomers as shown in Figure 28.1.



ethyne |


H H
| | |
etc
H H H


trans-poly(ethyne)


Figure 28.1: The polymerisation of ethyne (acetylene) to form a conducting polymer.


 
As drawn in Figure 28.1, the poly(ethyne) is in the trans-configuration rather than the cis-form of the
polymer. Figure 28.2 below shows how to represent the skeletal formulae of both forms. A polymer


chain with a mixture of cis- and trans-sections can be made by varying the reaction conditions.
In Figure 28.1 you can see the alternate double and single carbon-carbon bonds in poly(ethyne). This
can conduct electricity because its m bonding spreads continuously down the whole length of each
polymer chain. The overlapping p orbitals on neighbouring carbon atoms result in long bands of
delocalised electrons, above and below the plane of the atoms. These delocalised electrons are free to

move along the length of the polymer chains (see Sections 5.4 and 25.1).
Lots of research has been carried out to produce other conducting polymers with extended bonding


systems. Poly(ethyne) and some other examples are shown by their skeletal formulae in Figure 28.2.
Conducting polymers usually have other substances, such as iodine, added to improve their electrical
conductivity. This is called doping. They have a number of advantages over the metal conductors that
they can potentially replace. They do not corrode, are much less dense, and can be shaped more
easily. For example, they can be made into thin sheets to make flat panels that light up. They can also


now be used in LED lighting. They are also ideal in situations where saving weight is important.




trans-poly(ethyne)

AS,



poly(1,6-heptadiyne) poly(phenylene)


Figure 28.2: Some examples of conducting polymers: note the alternate double and single carbon-carbon bonds.


 
Questions for discussion
Working with another learner or group of learners:


e Suggest how poly(ethyne) can conduct electricity, using your knowledge of m bonding.


e Sketch a diagram to show how you visualise the extended bonding system in poly(ethyne).


e Suggest some uses of poly(ethyne) where saving weight is important.


 


28.1 Condensation polymerisation
In Chapter 27 we saw how amino acids can react together to form peptides. The reaction is called a
condensation reaction. We can think of it as an addition reaction (in which reactant molecules bond to each


other), followed by an elimination reaction (in which a small molecule is released).

For example, the following equation shows how three amino acid molecules can react to make a tripeptide:

R R R
| | |

COOH + +


| |


H H H


amino acid
R R R
|
—N—C—COOH + 2H,0
| | |


H



A large protein molecule, formed by condensation polymerisation, can contain thousands of amino acid
monomers. As each amino acid monomer joins the chain, an amide bond (or peptide bond) forms, and an


molecule is also produced (see Section 27.4).
We can recognise condensation polymerisation by its monomers that contain two different functional


groups capable of reacting with each other. This can occur in two ways:


 
the two different functional groups are found within the same molecule, as in amino acids. Each amino


acid monomer molecule has a basic functional group and an acidic -COOH functional group


 


 


 
the two different functional groups are found in two different molecules. For example, nylon 6,6 is


made from two different monomers: one monomer has two functional groups, and the other


monomer has two —COOH functional groups.


Condensation polymerisation also leads to the formation of small molecules, such as or HCI.
Question


Discuss the following questions with another learner:
Which of these monomers form addition polymers (see Section 15.5) and which form


condensation polymers?
i






b how you made your decisions in part a.
c i Write an equation to show the polymerisation reaction between propene molecules,


ii type of polymerisation reaction is shown in part c i?


What is the repeat unit of poly(propene)?
type of polymerisation reaction results in the formation of poly(peptides) and protein


polymers?


REFLECTION


At the start of this chapter so far, what have you found difficult? What did you find easy to do?
Reflect on any areas you would like to improve. Are you unsure about any of the work you have
studied on addition and condensation polymerisation? If so, read through the work again, and look


back to the polymer work in Chapters 15 and 27 then ask for help if anything is still not clear.


 


28.2 Synthetic polyamides


Nylons
Chemists have used condensation polymerisation to make synthetic polyamides since the 1930s. Nylon is
a polyamide. Nylon can be made from a variety of monomers, but all nylons are made in reactions between


the amine group and a carboxylic acid (-COOH) or the more reactive acyl chloride group
OH


atoms lost to form water ||
/

\ i





/ |
H H
H


amide link


or peptide link


For example, 1,6-diaminohexane reacts with hexanedioic acid to make nylon 6,6:


 


Figure 28.3: Climbers rely on nylon’s elasticity and high tensile strength to minimise the effects of a fall.


 


The numbers used in nylon 6,6 refer to the number of carbon atoms in each monomer unit.
dichloride, can be used as a more reactive, but more expensive, monomer


than hexanedioic acid.
Nylon’s low density, its strength and its elasticity make it a very useful fibre in the clothing industry. These


properties also make it ideal for climbing ropes (Figure 28.3).
During the manufacturing process, the nylon is forced out of nozzles and pulled into long fibres. This is
called cold drawing. lines up the nylon polymer chains along the length of the fibre. Strong hydrogen

bonds form between neighbouring chains, accounting for nylon’s high tensile strength and elasticity.
Kevlar®



Kevlar is a polyamide containing benzene rings. It is very strong, but flexible. It is also resistant to fire and


abrasion. It has these properties because of its structure.
The monomers that make Kevlar are an aryl diamine and an aryl dicarboxylic acid or chloride (Figure


28.4).


 
Q °

+
HO OH


or





cl cl
Figure 28.4: The monomers, 1,4-diaminobenzene and benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid, or benzene-1,4-dioyl chloride, that


react together to make the polymer Kevlar®.


 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 28.1


Making nylon
Place a shallow layer of aqueous 1,6-diaminohexane in a very small beaker. Carefully add a solution of
dichloride which will float on top of the aqueous layer of the diamine. Using a pair of
tweezers slowly draw out a long, thin thread of nylon 6,10 from the boundary between the two


immiscible layers where the nylon polymer is forming.


 
The formula and structure of Kevlar are shown in Figure 28.5. The long, linear polymer chains of Kevlar can
line up next to each other in a regular pattern. This results in extensive hydrogen bonding between the


polymer chains of Kevlar.

 

a






/


hydrogen

bonds hold
/ chains
together
N \


/
Figure 28.5: a The formula showing the repeat unit of Kevlar. b The hydrogen bonding between chains of the polyamide
(shown by three red dots). The latest tennis rackets contain Kevlar, where its low density and strength are important. The


wings of fighter jets can also be made of Kevlar.


 
The exceptional properties of Kevlar have also led to its use in making bullet-proof vests, ropes, fire-
protective clothing (as used by Formula 1 racing drivers) and modern ‘leathers’ worn by motorcycle riders.


The polymer is also used to reinforce other materials, such as the rubber in tyres.
Instead of using diamino and dicarboxylic acid monomers, it is also possible to make synthetic polymers
from monomers that contain both amino and carboxylic acid groups with the same monomer. These
monomers will react together in a similar way to the condensation polymerisation seen in nylons and


Kevlar to form polyamides.


Question
Different types of nylon are identified by the number of carbon atoms in each of its monomers, with


the diamine quoted first, followed by the dicarboxylic acid.


the skeletal formula of each monomer used to make nylon 6,10.
b the skeletal formulae in part a to draw an equation showing the condensation polymerisation


to make nylon 6,10 from a diamine and a dicarboxylic acid.
c i Draw the skeletal formula of an alternative monomer to the dicarboxylic acid drawn in part a


to make nylon 6,10.
ii would be the other product of the polymerisation reaction using the alternative


monomer?
d i Draw the displayed formula of Kevlar using its repeat unit in square brackets and n to


represent a very large number.


ii Explain in terms of structure and intermolecular forces why Kevlar is such a strong material.


REFLECTION
Make a table with two columns and place the parts of Question 2 in either the ‘Questions that | found


easy’ or ‘Questions that | struggled to answer’ columns.
Compare your table with others in the group; help each other with any issues, and identify any

problems that you need further support with.



28.3 Biochemical polyamides


Proteins are made from amino acids
Proteins have their monomers bonded to each other via amide bonds (or peptide bonds). This means that


polypeptides and proteins are types of polyamide.
The amino acids found in proteins are called a-amino acids (Figure 28.6). The names of the amino acids
found in proteins can be written in a shorthand form containing three letters. For example, Ala is alanine,


Try is tryptophan and Gin is glutamine.
atom (carbon-2)
H
\ carboxylic acid
amino group group
H R OH


side-chain


Figure 28.6: The generalised structure of an amino acid, highlighting the key features.
non-polar alanine (Ala)


valine (Val)


 
serine (Ser)
— COOH
|


CH2OH


electrically charged (acidic or basic) aspartic acid (Asp) H


lysine (Lys)

Table 28.1: Examples of the three different classes of side-chains (in red) in the amino acids found in proteins.


|
—COOH
|


CH,COOH


 


 
The 20 different amino acids that cells use to build proteins are distinguished by their side-chains (R
groups). The side-chains can be classified as non-polar, polar or electrically charged (acidic or basic). Table


28.1 shows some examples.


Proteins are condensation polymers
In Section 27.3 you learned that the group of one amino acid can react with the -COOH of another
amino acid to form a dipeptide by a condensation reaction. The links between individual units of the


polymer are called amide bonds (or peptide bonds). Additional amino acids can then react to form a


tripeptide, a tetrapeptide, and so on. Eventually a polypeptide, containing many peptide bonds, is formed.
A polypeptide chain may contain 50 to 2000 amino acids. An amino acid unit within a polypeptide chain is
called an amino acid residue. We draw the amino acid sequence in a polypeptide starting from the end


that has a free group (the N-terminal end).


COOH
Proteins may contain one or more polypeptide chains. Each protein has its own, unique function because


each protein has its own, unique 3D shape.
The primary structure of a polypeptide or protein is the order in which the amino acids are linked together.


The primary structure of one of the polypeptide chains of insulin is shown in Figure 28.7.


N-terminal C-terminal


 
Figure 28.7: The primary sequence of the insulin A chain, a short polypeptide of 21 amino acids. Notice the link


(disulfide bridge) between two amino acid residues. This helps maintain the shape of the polypeptide.


 


The structure of a protein:
is written with the amino acids numbered from the N-terminal end


determines the way that the protein can fold to form its unique shape
is held together by covalent bonds. These bonds are found within amino acid residues, and between


the residues as amide (or peptide) bonds.
Question


3 give the formulae of the two functional groups present in all amino acids.


b example of an amino acid with a non-polar side-chain.
c diagram of two molecules of serine to show the formation of hydrogen bonds between the


—OH groups of the side-chain (see Table 28.1).
one of the following shows the structural formula of the amide (or peptide) bond that links


amino acid monomers together in a polypeptide or a protein?





e what is meant by the term amino acid residue.


Polyesters
Polyesters are another type of condensation polymer. As you learned in Chapter 17, esters are made by

reacting carboxylic acids with alcohols:
carboxylic acid + alcohol > ester + water



Therefore, polyesters can be made by reacting dicarboxylic acids with diols, e.g. propanedioic acid and


ethane-1,2-diol. The most common polyester fibre is Terylene®.
Terylene is made from benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid and ethane-1,2-diol. The conditions required are a


catalyst such as oxide and heat:


HO OH
C


\ /

OH HO


fo)
/
|
\/


°
Poly(lactic acid), PLA, is another polyester. However, PLA is made using just one monomer, lactic acid. Its
systematic name is 2-hydroxypropanoic acid. The monomer contains the carboxylic acid and alcohol


(hydroxyl) groups within each molecule:


 
| |
HO—CH +HO—CH
OH OH OH


lactic acid |
CH3 O ?
etc. etc. + water


poly(lactic acid)


The ester group bonding each repeat unit together in the chain is shown in a structural formula as -COO-.
Question
Work as a pair on this question:


4 Draw the repeat unit of the polyester, PLA (shown above).


the repeat unit of Terylene.


REFLECTION
Reflect on the process you went through to determine the repeat unit. Are you confident you can go


through the same process for other polymers?


 


28.4 Degradable polymers
The disposal of polymer waste, much of it made up of poly(alkene)s, is an ever-increasing problem
worldwide. Poly(alkene)s, such as poly(ethene) and poly(propene), are chemically inert because their
polymer chains are non-polar, saturated hydrocarbons, like giant alkane molecules. This makes them non-


biodegradable.
However, chemists have developed degradable polymers that do break down when they are discarded. The
use of degradable polymers is becoming more common as people become aware of the issues related to
the disposal of poly(alkene)s as a result of their lack of reactivity (see Section 15.5, ‘Disposal of


poly(alkene) plastics’).
Two of the developments to help solve the disposal problem are biodegradable polymers and


photodegradable polymers (Figure 28.8).


Day 12


 


Figure 28.8: Chemists are developing plastics that can be broken down by microorganisms in soil or by light.


 


Biodegradable polymers
Some polymers, when buried for many years, eventually become brittle and break down into smaller
pieces that can be decomposed naturally by microorganisms in soil. If the surface area of the polymer
being buried could be increased, then it could degrade much more quickly. Scientists have developed
polymers that contain small amounts of starch granules that the bacteria and fungi in moist soil can break
down. So the polymer is broken into smaller pieces, with a larger surface area for decomposition to occur
faster. Other polymers are now made from monomers derived directly from plant materials, such as PLA,


which soil microorganisms can digest easily.
In polyamides, such as nylon, the amide bonds, between the repeat units can be broken down
over time. This occurs by hydrolysis in the hot, acidic conditions found in land-fill waste dumps with rotting

vegetation.

H
hydrolysis |

—C—N— + +


| OH |


H H
You can see the hydrolysis reaction of an amide in Section 27.5, in which carboxylic acids and amines are
formed. In hot, acidic conditions the products of hydrolysis of a polyamide are its original diamine and
dicarboxylic acid monomers or the original aminocarboxylic acid monomer. The amine groups will


react with any excess acid to make their ammonium salts.
With an excess of alkali, such as aqueous sodium hydroxide, the sodium salts of the original dicarboxylic
acid monomers (plus the diamine monomers) will form. If the polyamide was made from an

aminocarboxylic acid, then the sodium salt of the amino acid will form, for example,
In polyesters, the ester links (-COO-) are similarly broken down by acid hydrolysis, forming alcohols and
carboxylic acids (see Section 17.3).




ll hydrolysis 4


—C—O— + —— —C +
The polyester PLA, whose raw material is starch from crops such as corn, is now being used as a
biodegradable alternative to oil-based polymers. The ester links can be hydrolysed in acidic conditions to
break down the polymer chains when used items containing polyesters are dumped in land-fill sites.


Alcohol and carboxylic acids will be the products of the acid hydrolysis of polyesters.


IMPORTANT
Because they will undergo hydrolysis, this makes both polyamides and polyesters biodegradable,


unlike the nonbiodegradable polyalkenes.


 


Photodegradable polymers
Polymer chains also have been designed that incorporate carbonyl groups (>C=O) at intervals down their
length. These carbonyl groups absorb energy from the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
This causes the bonds in the region of the group to weaken and break down. As the polymer
breaks into smaller fragments, the polymer will biodegrade much more quickly if it is not chemically inert.


Polyamides and polyesters both contain carbonyl groups.
There is some debate as to whether photodegradable polymers are better for the environment or not. Ina
landfill site, the polymer waste is often buried under other rubbish and eventually soil, so there is no light
available to trigger the breakdown of the polymer chains. They also make recycling polymers problematic,


as they could weaken a recycled mixture of different polymers when it is put to a new use.


REFLECTION


Reflect on the problems that plastic waste is causing on our planet. Discuss the issues in small groups.
Present your findings to the other groups, and together make suggestions on how we can tackle the


issues raised.


In your group again, reflect on any ways in which you could improve future presentations.


 

28.5 Polymer deductions

You may encounter a variety of different problems about polymers to solve, such as:

predict the type of polymerisation reaction for a given monomer or pair of monomers


2 deduce the repeat unit of a polymer obtained from a given monomer or pair of monomers
3 deduce the type of polymerisation reaction that produces a given section of a polymer molecule


4


identify the monomer(s) from a given section of a polymer molecule.
Predicting the type of polymerisation reaction for given


monomer(s)


Addition polymers
Given a monomer that contains the C=C double bond, it will undergo addition polymerisation. Many
addition polymers are made using one type of monomer, e.g. poly(propene) from propene monomers.
(However, co-polymers can also be produced by using more than one type of unsaturated monomer, e.g.
with and in the reaction mixture). See Section 15.5 to remind yourself about


tackling questions on addition polymers.


Condensation polymers
When identifying monomers used in condensation polymerisation, look out for the presence of two
functional groups that will react with each other, giving off a small molecule in the reaction. These two
functional groups can be in the same molecule, as in the case of poly(lactic acid) in Section 28.3, or at
either end of two different monomers, as in nylon 6,6 in Section 28.3. The functional groups involved in

condensation polymerisation are usually:
amines and carboxylic acids (-COOH) producing a polyamide and


amines and acyl chlorides (-COCI) producing a polyamide and HCI
carboxylic acids (-COOH) and alcohols producing a polyester and


acyl chlorides (-COCI) and alcohols producing a polyester and HCI.


Deducing the repeat unit of a polymer for given


Addition polymers
If you are given a monomer with a C=C double bond, simply turn the double bond into a single bond


and show the bonds either side of the two C atoms that would continue the chain:


addition cl
polymerisation |

>





H H H H


n


monomer repeat unit


 


 

Condensation polymers
If you are given monomers with two reactive functional groups, draw the product formed when two
monomers react together. Then take off the atoms at both ends that would be lost if another two
monomers were to react with those groups:


 
O—H
+
H H H H

n H—O—C—C—C—C—O—H

H H H H


\

n




Deducing the type of polymerisation reaction for a given


section of a polymer chain


Addition polymers
Polymers resulting from addition polymerisation will have repeat units with no functional groups in the


actual chain of carbon atoms that forms the ‘backbone’ of the polymer. Poly(phenylethene) is an example:


 


poly(phenylethene)
Note that functional groups may be present on the side-chains, such as the nitrile group, -CN. However,


the ‘backbone’ in addition polymers usually consists of a chain of carbon atoms.


Condensation polymers
Polymers resulting from condensation polymerisation will have amide links (-CONH-) or ester links


(-COO-) in the ‘backbone’ of the polymer chain. For example:



etc.—O—CH CH CH—C—etc.
Identifying the monomer(s) present in a given section of a


polymer chain
This is an extension of the approach above. Having decided whether the polymer was made in an addition


or a condensation polymerisation, you can then split the polymer chain into its repeat units.


Addition polymers


With an addition polymer, you need to put the C=C double bond back into the monomer:


 
H H
| |


H H H H H H




part of addition polymer


|
H H
|
c—c c=C
| | | |
H
n


repeat unit monomer


Condensation polymers
With condensation polymers, you need to identify the atoms from the small molecules given off in the


polymerisation reaction and replace them on the reactive functional groups in the monomers.


 


 

Il ll ll ll
N—C C—N N—C C—N
| |
H H H H
part of condensation plymer (Kevlar®)

[ i i |

|
L H H
repeat unit
and HOOC COOH
monomers or


cocl


 
Question
5 What type of polymerisation reaction formed the polymer shown below?
H H O H
| |
C—N C—N—C—C—N—C—C
| |


H O H H H

the displayed formula of the single monomer used to make the polymer shown in part a.
Compare your answers with another learner and discuss the thought process you went through to
arrive at your answers. Then check them against the answers provided and seek help if you are
unsure.


SUMMARY
Polymers are very large molecules that are built up from a very large number of small molecules known as


monomers.
Remember from Chapter 15 that addition polymerisation occurs when an unsaturated monomer, such as an alkene,
bonds to itself in an addition reaction. Poly(ethene), poly(propene), poly(chloroethene) and poly(phenylethene) are


all common addition polymers.
Condensation polymerisation involves the loss of a small molecule (usually water or hydrogen chloride) in the
reaction between two monomer molecules. Both polyesters and polyamides are formed by condensation


polymerisation.
Polyamides are formed by condensation polymerisation between an amine group and a carboxylic acid group. These
groups may be in the same monomer or on different monomers. Nylon 6,6 is formed in a condensation


polymerisation between 1,6-diaminohexane and hexanedioic acid.
Condensation polymerisation between the amino and carboxylic acid groups in amino acids produces a polypeptide
or protein. The links between the repeat units in these polymers are called amide bonds, also known as peptide


bonds.
The polyester called Terylene is formed by condensation polymerisation of benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid with


ethane-1,2-diol. is the small molecule eliminated in the reaction.
The amino acids molecules that react to form proteins contain a carboxylic acid, an amino group and a side-chain


(represented by R) all attached to the same carbon atom. They have the general formula
Proteins and polypeptides can be hydrolysed by refluxing in a strong acid, such as forming amino acids (2-


aminocarboxylic acids).
Polyesters and polyamides are biodegradable by acidic or alkaline hydrolysis and by the action of light, breaking


their ester or amide links between their monomers in the polymer chains.


 


 


Explain the term condensation polymer. [2]
Kevlar is a condensation polymer that is used for making bullet-proof vests.

Here are two monomers that could be used for making Kevlar:
HO
\

\
OH
Explain the term monomer. [1]
Give the structure of Kevlar, showing its repeat unit. [2]
iii Name the type of condensation polymer that Kevlar is classified as. [1]
how the chains of Kevlar are held together to make it such a strong material. [3]
[Total: 9]


are condensation polymers.
Give the structures of two monomers that could be used to make a polyester. [2]


Give the structure of the polyester formed from these two monomers. [2]


[Total: 4]

Glycine is an amino acid with the formula
Give the systematic name for glycine. [1]


ii Give the structure of the polymer that could be formed from glycine, showing at
least two repeat units. [2]
Name the linkage between the repeat units. [1]


iv State what type of attractive force forms between the chains of poly(glycine). [1]

acid is capable of forming polymers.

Give the structure of 3-hydroxypropanoic acid. [1]
Give the structure of the polymer formed from this acid, showing at least two repeat


units. [2]


Name the linkage present in the polymer. [1]
iv State what type of attractive force forms between chains of poly(3-


hydroxypropanoic acid). [1]
[Total: 10]
Sections of some polymers are shown below. For each polymer:


i identify the repeat unit


ii give the structures of the monomers used to make each polymer.


[3]


 


 
[3]
|
[2]
d
O O O


[3]
e
CH CH CH C




[2]


[Total: 13]
5 Give the structures of the polymers formed from the monomers given below, showing


at least two repeat units. For each polymer identify the following:
i the repeat unit


the type of linkage present


attractive force between the polymer chains.

\
OH
/
HO
[3]

\ 4

HO OH
[3]
[Total: 6]


6 Explain the term biodegradable. [2]
Explain how the production of biodegradable polymers has lessened the impact of


polymers on the environment. [3]
acid) is a biodegradable polymer. Give two uses of poly(L-lactic acid) and


explain how its properties make it suitable for each use. [4]


[Total: 9]


SELF-EVALUATION


 


After studying this chapter, complete a table like this:
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
describe the characteristics of condensation polymerisation in
28.1, 28.2


polyesters and polyamides
describe how polyesters are formed from:
and a dicarboxylic acid or a dioy! chloride


hydroxycarboxylic acid


describe how polyamides are formed from:
and a dicarboxylic acid or a dioyl chloride

acids

deduce repeat units, identify monomer(s) and predict the type
of polymerisation reaction which produces a given section of a | 28.4, 28.5

polymer molecule
recognise that polyalkenes are chemically inert and therefore
nonbiodegradable but that polyesters and polyamides are 28.4


biodegradable, either by acidic hydrolysis, alkaline hydrolysis

or by action of light.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


BEFORE YOU START
Working in a small group:
Discuss what we mean by optical isomerism.


Describe the structural feature of a molecule that displays optical isomerism.
Draw a molecule that will exhibit optical isomerism and swap with a partner to draw its optical


isomer.
Working with a partner, take turns to describe the following types of reaction to each other, giving


an example to show what happens in the reaction:
addition
condensation
hydrolysis
substitution.


Look back to Chapter 14 if you are having trouble with the tasks above.


DESIGNING A DRUG


 


Figure 29.1: Chemists around the world work in large teams to model, develop and test new medicinal drugs.


 
How do we go about designing new molecules to fight diseases? One way is to identify the structural
features the new drug will need to stop particular bacteria or viruses working (Figure 29.1). The
structural features may be associated with the active site on a particular enzyme needed for an
essential function of the pathogen (the disease-causing organism). Once these structural features
have been identified, we can then predict the shape of a molecule that would fit into, and then block,


the active site.
The functional groups present are also very important to ensure the drug can bind into the active site
effectively. The intermolecular bonds formed between the drug and its target molecule could involve
hydrogen bonding, ionic attraction, dipole-dipole forces, and instantaneous dipole-induced dipole


forces (see Chapter 4).
Computers are now used to judge the fit between a potential drug molecule and a receptor site on its
target molecule. Such ‘molecular modelling’ has greatly speeded up the process of designing new
medicines. The interactions and fit of a potential medicine with a biological receptor molecule can be
studied before the medicine is ever made in the lab. Before molecular modelling became available, the
synthesis of a new medicine involved far more trial and error, with chemists having to prepare many


more possible medicines for testing.

This type of research was used in the fight against AIDS in the late 1980s and 1990s. Scientists using
X-ray crystallography (a method in which a sample is irradiated with X-rays and the pattern is analysed
by computer) worked out the shape of HIV protease in 1988 (Figure 29.2). Knowing its structure made


the search for drugs to fight AIDS much quicker and cheaper than traditional trial-and-error methods.


 
Figure 29.2: A ‘ribbon diagram’ showing the symmetrical HIV protease molecule, with its active site in the centre of


the molecule.


 
This enzyme plays an important role when the virus becomes infectious. Researchers realised that if a
molecule could be discovered that could block its active site, this might be one step on the route to
finding a cure for AIDS. Knowing the molecule that the enzyme worked on (its substrate), researchers

were able to construct similar molecules on the computer screen to fit the active site.
In less than eight years, pharmaceutical companies had developed three new anti-viral drugs for
people with HIV / AIDS and the death rate from AIDS dropped significantly. These inhibitors are now


one part of a cocktail of drugs that can be used to treat the disease.


Question for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners how molecular modelling has helped in the search for


new and improved medicinal drugs. Think about:


e the method used to determine the structure of HIV protease


e how anti-viral drugs work


e the time and costs involved.


 


29.1 Chirality in pharmaceutical synthesis
The pharmaceutical industry is constantly searching for new drugs. Research chemists have discovered
that most of these drugs contain at least one chiral centre (see Section 14.6). Remember that a molecule
containing a carbon atom bonded to four different atoms or groups of atoms can exist as two non-
superimposable mirror images. The carbon atom is called a chiral centre. These two mirror-image isomers
are called enantiomers and they will be optically active. They differ only in their ability to rotate the plane
of polarised light to the left or to the right, and in their potential biological activity (and hence their


effectiveness as medicines).
Using conventional organic reactions to make the desired product will yield a 50 : 50 mixture of the two
enantiomers. We call this a racemic mixture. Although the physical and chemical properties of the
enantiomers will be identical, each differs in its biological (or pharmaceutical) activity, i.e. the effect the
drug has on the body. For example, naproxen is a drug used to treat the pain caused by arthritis (see Figure


29.3). One of its enantiomers will ease the pain but the other can cause liver damage.
As another example of the need to separate the enantiomers from a racemic mixture, one enantiomer of a


drug used to treat tuberculosis (TB) is effective, whereas the other can cause blindness.


IMPORTANT


Chemists ideally need a single pure enantiomer to put in their drug product.


Note that about 80% of new drugs patented are single enantiomers.

 

Using pure enantiomers will be beneficial as it:
reduces the patient’s dosage by half as the pure enantiomer is more potent, i.e. has better therapeutic


activity (thereby cutting the cost of production)
minimises the risk of side-effects (thereby protecting patients from further problems and protecting

drug companies from possible legal action for damages if serious side-effects do occur).
At this point, you can also refer to the ‘Fighting cancer’ section at the start of Chapter 24, which looks at
the drug cis-platin.


29.2 Preparing pure enantiomers for use as drugs


Optical resolution
This method involves chemists following a traditional synthetic route to make the compound, resulting in a
racemic (50 : 50) mixture. Then they separate the two enantiomers in a process called optical resolution.
This involves using a pure enantiomer of another optically active compound (called a chiral auxiliary) that
will react with one of the isomers in the mixture. The new product formed will now have different properties
and so can be separated by physical means. For example, their solubility in a given solvent will differ so the
unwanted enantiomer and the new product can be separated by fractional crystallisation. The new product


is then converted back to the desired enantiomer in a simple reaction (e.g. by adding dilute alkali).
The crystallisation is repeated many times to ensure purity. This method is difficult, time-consuming, uses


extra reagents and involves the disposal of half the original racemic mixture.
Large volumes of organic solvents (often harmful to the environment) are used in the process. However,
chemists are now using supercritical carbon dioxide as a solvent, which is much safer. At 31 °C and 73
atmospheres pressure, is a suitable non-polar solvent for many drug derivatives in the racemic
resolution process. The solubility of the derivatives can be changed simply by varying the density of the
solvent. The solvent, which is non-toxic, is easily removed by reducing the pressure and then recycling it to


use in the process again.
We can also use high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to separate a racemic mixture, as long as


the stationary medium (i.e. the solid that packs the column) is itself optically active.


Using optically active starting materials
This technique uses starting materials that are themselves optically active and in the same orientation as
the desired product. These are often naturally occurring compounds such as carbohydrates or L-amino
acids. The biochemist will choose from this ‘chiral pool’. The synthetic route is designed to keep any
intermediates and the final product formed in the same enantiomeric form. As a result, there is no need to


carry out the costly separation process needed when a racemic mixture is produced.


Chiral catalysts


If possible, the most efficient way to prepare a pure enantiomer is to use a chiral catalyst.
Chemists are also developing new chiral catalysts that ensure only one specific enantiomer is formed in a
reaction. The benefits of these catalysts are that only small quantities are needed and they can be used
over and over again, although the catalyst itself can be expensive. A ruthenium (Ru) organometallic


catalyst is used in the production of naproxen, a drug to treat arthritis (see Figure 29.3).
Often scientists need a combination of optical resolution and chiral synthesis in the production of a


pharmaceutically active, pure enantiomer.
The pharmaceutical industry can also use enzymes to promote stereoselectivity and produce single-
enantiomer products. The specific shape and the nature of the molecular interactions at the active site of
an enzyme (a biological catalyst) ensure that only one enantiomer will be formed, as in living things. The
enzymes are often immobilised (fixed in place) on inert supports. This enables the reactants to be passed


over them without the need to separate the product from the enzymes after the reaction.
However, it can be expensive isolating enzymes from living things. Using whole organisms, such as
bacteria, can reduce this cost. In recent times, synthetic enzymes designed for a particular synthesis have
also been made. Therefore, a search for a suitable enzyme from the limited pool available from natural


sources is not always necessary.
Overall, using an enzyme process might take longer to develop than a conventional synthetic route, but in
the long run the benefits generally outweigh the disadvantages. There are fewer steps needed in the


synthesis route, resulting in a ‘greener’ process.

ruthenium catalyst


(a chiral catalyst)




naproxen


(drug for arthritis)
Figure 29.3: The chiral catalyst (an organometallic ruthenium compound) ensures only the desired enantiomer is formed:
in this case, the naproxen enantiomer that is effective in treating arthritis. The chiral centre in naproxen is marked with an


asterisk. The marked carbon atom is also known as an ‘asymmetric carbon’.


 
Question


Discuss these questions in a small group before writing your answers.
pure enantiomers rather than racemic mixtures the better option for use as


pharmaceutical drugs from the point of view of:
i a patient


ii company?
b are modern chiral catalyst-based processes, or using enzymes, for manufacturing pure
enantiomers more sustainable (environmentally friendly) than traditional synthetic routes used by

the pharmaceutical industry?
c Find out why the drug thalidomide resulted in legal action against its manufacturer.


29.3 Synthetic routes
When research chemists want to make a new compound, they usually work backwards from the desired
compound to create a series of reactions, starting with a compound extracted from a commonly available
raw material. In industry, common starting materials are hydrocarbons from crude oil and its refining, and


compounds extracted from plants, such as esters from vegetable oils.


REFLECTION
on how a molecule containing two chiral centres could have no effect on plane-polarised


light. Discuss your reasoning with a partner.
Discuss with a partner your ideas about why pairs of enantiomers differ in their effectiveness as


drugs. Think about the role of active sites in how enzymes work.
Are you Satisfied that you understand the terms and issues regarding the use of enantiomers in
medicinal drugs? If not, it is a good idea to revise the basics of stereoisomerism in Chapter 14, and
read through the start of this chapter again, making notes about any points you need support


with.


4 What other learning strategies will you use when looking back at Chapter 14?

 

You will need some of the skills of a research chemist when tackling questions that involve:
predicting the reactions of complex molecules you have never seen before, containing more than one


functional group


suggesting a series of reactions to make a given compound from a given starting compound.
In order to be successful in answering these questions, you will need to be familiar with all the reactions


and conditions of each homologous series mentioned in the syllabus.
The flow chart in Figure 29.4 is a summary of some of the most useful reactions you need to know.
However, you could be asked about others, so it is a good idea to make your own summary spider charts


for all the reactions in Chapters 15 to 18, and 25 to 28.
     
       


  
      

 

heat ultraviolet

under pressure light with


with nickel halogen, room
catalyst temperature heat under pressure heat with


and pressure with ammonia in alcohol alcohol and
  
 
  
  
 
  


  


acid catalyst
  


  


  


 


halogenoalkanes carboxylic acids
     
  
  
   
    


 


treat with HX(aq), heat with
     
     
   
  
  
  
    
 


 
   
     
   


  
room temperature warm with
and distil from mixture NaBH, in
of alcohol, conc. water acid catalyst


heat with dilute and KX(s)
  
   
  


   


aqueous alkali reflux with excess
   
 


    


aldehydes


acidified potassium
 
   


  


   
warm
hot pumice with NaBH,


pass alkene and and Al,O3 in water heat with
steam over heated
phosphoric acid catalyst


under pressure
    


 


water and


distil on adding to acidified acid catalyst


potassium


Figure 29.4: Some of the important organic reactions you need to remember for both the AS and A Level courses.


 
For example, for Chapter 16 write the word ‘Halogenoalkane’ in a box and draw arrows radiating out from
the box to the products made in their reactions, labelling the arrows with other reactants and the reaction


conditions. Displaying these on a wall and using different colours will help you remember them.
Suppose we want to convert ethene to ethanoic acid. A possible route is to convert ethene to ethanol,


which is then oxidised to ethanoic acid. Alternatively, ethene could be converted to bromoethane, which is
then hydrolysed to ethanol, and this is oxidised to ethanoic acid. This second alternative involves an extra
reaction step. You should usually try to complete a synthesis in as few steps as possible. Remember that


material is lost at each stage when preparing organic compounds. Reaction yields seldom approach 100%.
You also need to recall the reactions of benzene and its related compounds. Figure 29.5 provides you with a
summary of reactions involving aromatic compounds. You can try copying and displaying the reaction
summaries (from Figures 29.4 and 29.5) where you will look at them regularly: this will help you to learn


the reactions and their conditions.
OH
HNO, / NaNO, +
2 2
with
phenol diazonium chloride phenylamine
reflux with
tin and conc. HCI
followed by NaOH (aq)
Br NO,
conc. and
+ catalyst O cone. , 50°C



bromobenzene benzene nitrobenzene


   
heat

AICI, catalyst
+ catalyst
Q

CH,


methylbenzene benzoyl chloride


Figure 29.5: Summary of reactions involving aromatic (aryl) compounds needed for the A Level course.


 


Question
2 Show a sequence of reactions to plan how the following conversions can be made in two- or three-step

syntheses.

Include the conditions required for each reaction.
(Start by drawing the structural formulae of the initial and final compounds).

to ethylamine.


b to ethyl benzoate.


to butanoic acid.


to 2-aminobutane.


REFLECTION
Join another learner to reflect on how well you tackled these four problems. Discuss the thought


processes you used when solving each problem.
Which problem did you find easiest and which was most difficult? Think about why some problems are


easier than others and what you need to do to successfully design synthetic routes.


 

Adding carbon atoms
Sometimes the starting compound from a raw material does not have enough carbon atoms in its



molecules to make the desired product. An extra carbon atom can be added by adding the nitrile functional


group, -C=N. Remember that these can be made from halogenoalkanes:


RBr + HCN reflux with ethanolic KCN RC=N+Br


 


where R is an alkyl group, so RC=N has an extra carbon atom.
The RC=N molecule can be either hydrolysed to make a carboxylic acid (by refluxing with dilute


hydrochloric acid) or reduced to make an amine (by adding in dry ether).
We can add an alkyl or acyl side-chain to a benzene ring by carrying out a Friedel-Crafts reaction, which is


another useful reaction when planning synthetic routes.
For example:
+ CH; CH; + HCl
benzene ethylbenzene
Question
3 functional groups in the molecules of:


i aspirin

ii paracetamol.


H H

H




aspirin paracetamol
b i Both the molecules in part a are broken down when refluxed with dilute hydrochloric acid.


Write equations for the reactions of aspirin and paracetamol with

ii Give the name of the type of reaction in b i.
Name the organic products A to D in the synthetic route below:



boil with NaOH(aq)


A

add excess



B

add



c

add conc. ammonia


D


 
d i Devise a three-stage synthetic route to convert benzene into benzenediazonium chloride.


ii how you would convert the benzenediazonium chloride into an orange dye.
Which one of the following formulae is the correct formula of a benzenediazonium cation?




REFLECTION


Reflect on the chemistry of aryl compounds with a partner. Do you find their reactions more difficult to


understand and remember than other organic reactions?
Discuss with a partner any ways you have found useful to help recall organic reactions and the

conditions they need. Share your ideas with another pair.



SUMMARY
Both natural biochemical compounds and modern medicinal drugs contain chiral molecules. Generally, only one of
the enantiomers of a drug is beneficial to living organisms and the other isomer may have undesirable effects. The
beneficial isomer has the appropriate shape and pattern of intermolecular forces to interact with a receptor


molecule in a living organism.


Chemists are now producing drugs containing single enantiomers rather than a racemic mixture of isomers. This
enables the dose to be halved, improves biological / pharmacological activity (behaviour of molecule in an


organism), reduces side-effects, and minimises litigation against manufacturers.


Recognising the functional groups in a given organic molecule enables us to predict its reactions.
Knowing the reactions of the different functional groups in organic reactions enables us to devise synthetic routes to


make given compounds.


 


EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
of lactic acid, CH3CH(OH)COOH, was extracted from a natural source and found to be


optically active.


It was then subjected to two reactions, as shown below.
CH; CH(OH)COOH CH; COCOOH “23 CH; CH(OH)COOH
sample 1 sample 2


Sample 1 was optically active but sample 2 was not optically active.


Give the systematic name for lactic acid. [1]


ii The structure of one optical isomer of the lactic acid is:


COOH
Draw the other optical isomer. [1]
iii Explain why lactic acid can form optical isomers.
b Give the reagents and conditions necessary for step A. [2]
ii Give the balanced equation for the reaction. [2]
Give the reagents and conditions necessary for step B. [2]
ii Give the balanced equation for the reaction. [2]
d Give the mechanism for step B. The first step involves nucleophilic attack on the
carbon of the ketone group by an H— ion from [5]
ii Explain why sample 2 does not show any optical activity: it does not rotate the
plane of polarised light. [3]
e Explain why lactic acid can be polymerised. [2]
ii State the type of polymerisation reaction that this an example of. [1]


Draw the repeat unit of poly(lactic acid). [1]
[Total: 23]
2 how 2-aminopropanoic acid can be prepared from lactic acid in two steps. You
should give the reagents and conditions necessary plus balanced symbol equations for the


reactions taking place.


[Total: 9]


The structure of the compound known as thalidomide can be shown as:
fe}
N

H


the molecule and label the chiral centre on your drawing. [1]


Route II poly(ethene)


 


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs Almost Ready to


section... more work there move on
explain the meaning of enantiomers, chiral centres, polarised


light, optically active mixtures and racemic mixtures
state reasons why the synthetic preparation of drug molecules
often requires the production of a single optical isomer, e.g. 29.2

better therapeutic activity, fewer side-effects

for an organic molecule containing several functional groups:
identify organic functional groups using key reactions 29.3


properties and reactions
devise multi-stage synthetic routes for preparing organic 29.3

molecules using key reactions.



images


 


 


 


 


LEARNING INTENTIONS


 


BEFORE YOU START
The analytical techniques introduced in this chapter are used together with mass spectrometry


(Chapter 3) and infrared spectroscopy (Chapter 18).
Working in a group of five, choose one of the following topics to teach the rest of the group how to use


a mass spectrum to deduce:
relative molecular mass of an organic compound
the number of carbon atoms in a molecule using the [M + 1] peak
the number of chlorine and bromine atoms in a molecule using the [M + 2] peak


the structure of an organic molecule from its fragmentation pattern on a mass spectrum


how we use infrared spectroscopy to identify organic compounds.


 
NMR spectroscopy (see Section 30.4) is an analytical tool used extensively to find out the structures of
biological macromolecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids. As well as identifying the different
types of atoms present, more sophisticated data can give, for example, the distance between
atoms in macromolecules. Large amounts of data are collected and analysed by computer programs to


reveal the shape of the molecules under investigation.
Figures 30.1, 30.2 and 30.3 show images obtained from NMR analysis of protein molecules made up


from over 100 amino acid residues (see Section 28.3). These images are called ribbon diagrams.


 


Figure 30.1: A protein made up of 106 amino acid residues.


 
This type of NMR analysis takes place in solution, so it is particularly useful for medical research. Many
human proteins exist in solution in the body so we can mimic the interactions that take place in cells


or in the bloodstream.


 


Figure 30.2: A protein made up of 153 amino acid residues.

 
Ribbon diagrams were developed in the 1980s, with Jane Richardson’s hand-drawn images published
in the Journal Advances in Protein Chemistry (Figure 30.4).



At present, these useful images are computer generated, sometimes with areas of the protein shown


using the ball-and-stick model to add extra detail.


 


 
Figure 30.4: Jane Richardson is known as ‘The mother of the ribbon diagrams’. She was born in 1941 and heads a
research group at Duke University in America, where she has worked since 1970. Ribbon diagrams are also referred to


as ‘Richardson diagrams’.


 
Questions for discussion
Discuss with another learner or group of learners:


e What are the benefits of using ribbon diagrams when investigating proteins?
Carry out some research to find out more about the scientist Jane Richardson: her life and her


work. Decide together on a way to present your findings to the rest of the group.


 


30.1 General principles of chromatography


The basics of chromatography
You will be familiar with the technique of paper chromatography. It is used to separate mixtures as a


solvent moves up a piece of absorbent paper.
We call the solvent the mobile phase, and water trapped between the cellulose fibres of the paper is the
stationary phase. The substances in the mixture will have different affinities for the solvent and for the


water, and so they move at different rates over the paper. Look at Figure 30.5.



supporting rod


paper
  
 


   


solvent


 


sample to be
separated


pure reference pure reference of solutes


compounds compounds to be identified
Figure 30.5: a Paper chromatography. b The chromatogram produced. Components of the mixture can be identified by
comparison with pure reference compounds or by calculating values (see Figure 30.6) and comparing these values with


those in tables of data.


 
The R; values (retardation factors) of substances are calculated as shown in Figure 30.6. The conditions
must be identical to those quoted in the R; data table, e.g. the same temperature and the same solvent


used.


solvent front
value is


y value is


 


 


compound started here
Figure 30.6: How to calculate values, which are then compared with reference values obtained under identical


conditions.


 
Coloured substances can be seen directly on the paper but others are sprayed with a chemical that forms
coloured compounds on the chromatogram. For example, amino acids can be revealed as bluish spots by


ninhydrin spray.


Partition coefficients in chromatography
The principle of partition of a solute between two solvents (see Section 21.6) helps us to understand more

fully how the components in a mixture are separated in chromatography.
In paper chromatography the different partition coefficients of the components in a mixture correspond to



their relative solubilities in the two solvents. The mobile phase is the solvent chosen. The other solvent is
the water trapped in the paper’s structure, which is the stationary phase. Figure 30.7 shows solute


molecules partitioned between the mobile phase and a stationary liquid phase on a solid support.
The solutes in the mixture being separated are partitioned to different extents between the solvents in the
mobile and stationary phases. The greater the relative solubility in the mobile phase, the faster the rate of


movement as the mobile phase passes over the stationary phase.
solute molecules
dissolved in the stationary


stationary liquid phase


 


solid support
Figure 30.7: Partition paper chromatography. The mobile phase (solvent) moves over the stationary liquid phase (water
trapped between the paper fibres), carrying solute particles with it. The filter paper is the solid support in paper


chromatography.


 


Question


at this paper chromatogram:


solvent front


 


Figure 30.8: Paper chromatogram for Question 1.


 
The solvent used was ethanol. Which sample of ink, A, B or C, has the greatest relative solubility


in ethanol?
out the R; value of the ink whose partition coefficient in ethanol and water lies between the


values of the other two inks.
Share your answers to Question 1 with another learner and explain your reasoning to each other. Then


mark each other’s answers using the answers provided.


30.2 Thin-layer chromatography
In thin-layer chromatography, referred to as TLC, the stationary phase is a solid that adsorbs the solute


molecules under investigation onto its surface (Figure 30.9).
solute molecules adsorbed on the


surface of the stationary phase



polar solid surface


Figure 30.9: Adsorption thin-layer chromatography. The mobile phase moves over the stationary solid phase.


 
The solid stationary phase is usually alumina which is made into a slurry with water and spread
onto a microscope slide. This is then put into an oven, where it dries out into a solid white coating on the


glass. A chromatogram is then made in a similar way to paper chromatography (Figure 30.10).


PRACTICAL ACTIVITY 30.1


Making a thin-layer chromatogram


lid
thin layer of
Al,O3 coated
onto a glass or


plastic surface
mixture of


solutes


 


 


solvent


Figure 30.10: Thin-layer chromatography.


 
You can measure the distance from the baseline (the centre of the original mixture) to the solvent front
(the height the solvent front rises to). Then measure the distance between the baseline and the centre


of each solute. Using this information, you can then calculate the values of the solutes.


 
Polar molecules have a greater attraction for a polar solid used as the stationary phase, and they are
adsorbed more strongly onto its surface. Therefore, they travel more slowly up the thin layer of aluminium
oxide, and separation occurs. Solutes are located on the chromatogram and identified by comparing with


standard known substances or by calculating values.
Note that although TLC is normally described as adsorption chromatography, some partitioning does occur
if water is present. Dried aluminium oxide can become rehydrated. When this happens, water also acts as a


partitioning stationary phase together with the adsorbing stationary solid phase.
TLC is quicker than paper chromatography and can be used on smaller samples, making it useful in

forensic science, where it can be used to identify drugs and explosive residues.
For example, when forensic scientists use TLC to analyse a substance that is suspected to be cannabis, the
stationary phase is silicon dioxide (silica) sprayed with silver nitrate solution, which is then dried. The
mobile phase is the non-polar solvent methylbenzene.


Question
2 separate mixtures of components. What do we call the mechanism of separation usually


at work in TLC?
b of propanone and hexane was separated on a TLC chromatogram using aluminium
oxide as the stationary phase and methylbenzene as the solvent. Which substance would you
expect to rise further up the chromatogram? Discuss your reasoning with another learner, then


write down your answer.


30.3 Gas-liquid chromatography


In gas-liquid chromatography (GLC), a gaseous sample under investigation enters a long column.


IMPORTANT
The column contains the stationary phase and the sample is moved through by an inert carrier gas. In


a mixture, the components will move through the column at different rates


 
This method can be used with gases, and volatile liquids or solids (as they must be in the form of a


vapour).


The apparatus is shown in Figure 30.10.
The stationary phase is a non-volatile liquid that has a high boiling point. This is often a long-chain, non-


polar hydrocarbon, bonded onto a solid support, e.g. small particles of silica packed tightly into a column.


The mobile phase is an inert (unreactive) ‘carrier’ gas, such as helium or nitrogen.
The tiny solid particles in the column have a very large surface area over which partitioning can occur,


resulting in excellent separation.
The more non-polar components in the mixture have a greater relative interaction with the non-polar liquid
on the solid particles (stationary phase). Therefore, they are carried through the column more slowly than


components whose molecules are more polar.
The detector at the end of the column records retention times, i.e. how long it takes each component to


pass through the column.
carrier gas
(mobile


phase) in
  
 


 
computer


or recorder
    
    


    
sample injected
through silicone


rubber septum
injector


port


detector


detector
injector


oven


oven
column (1-5 m long,


3-6 mm diameter)


column oven
Figure 30.11: Gas-liquid chromatography (GLC). The oven maintains a constant temperature, higher than the boiling

point of the components in the mixture to be analysed.




     


 
propanone


pentan-2-one
ethoxyethane


heptane
Recorder response


ethanal
5 10 152 0
time of Time / min


injection


Figure 30.12: A gas chromatogram from a mixture of volatile organic compounds.


 
As in all chromatography, the conditions must be controlled in order to make comparisons with published
databases. The chromatogram must be obtained using the same carrier gas, flow rate of gas, stationary


phase and temperature that were used when the standard data was obtained.


Figure 30.12 shows a chromatogram obtained using GLC.
Analysis by gas-liquid chromatography does have some limitations. For example, similar compounds will
have similar retention times. Also, if a newly discovered compound is detected, it will not have a match in


the database of retention times.
Determination of the percentage composition of a mixture by


GLC
For quantitative analysis, the component peaks are first identified and then the area of each is measured.


The peaks are roughly triangular in shape so their area is approximately:


x base x height (i.e. the area of a triangle)
The GLC machine usually measures the area of the peak automatically and can print the results with the
chromatogram. If the peaks are very narrow or have similar base widths, then peak height may be used


instead of peak area to estimate the proportion of components in a mixture.
For this method:


the chromatogram must show peaks for all the components in the mixture


all the components of the mixture must be separated
e the detector must respond equally to the different components so that peak area is directly


proportional to the component concentration.
The amount of each component in a mixture is found by expressing it as a percentage of the sum of the


areas under all the peaks.


For example, for a mixture of three esters A, B and C:


(approx.) % of ester A
peak area (or height) of A


sum of the areas (or heights) of A, B and


 


x 100


 
GLC is used to test for steroids in competing athletes and to test the fuels used in Formula One motor
racing (Figure 30.13). It is also used for medical diagnosis in analysing blood samples. With GLC, it is
possible to determine the percentages of dissolved oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide


in blood samples as small as 1.0
GLC is often combined with mass spectrometry to separate then rapidly identify the components of a


mixture.


 


Figure 30.13: GLC is used to check that the components in the fuel used in Grand Prix cars conform to strict regulations.


 


REFLECTION
At this point in the chapter, reflect on any aspects of chromatography that you found difficult to


understand?


Which parts are you confident that you understand well?


Talk over any issues with a partner, and seek further assistance if you are still unsure.


 
Question
3 For GLC separations explain:
i how retention time is measured

ii how the areas under the component peaks are used.
b what you can use as an approximate measure of the proportion of a component in a mixture
from a GLC chromatogram which produces sharp peaks.


30.4 Proton (1H) nuclear magnetic resonance


How NMR works
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a widely used analytical technique for organic
compounds. NMR uses the fact that the nucleus of each hydrogen atom in an organic molecule behaves
like a tiny magnet. The nucleus of a hydrogen atom consists of a single proton. This proton can spin. The


spinning motion of the positively charged proton causes a very small magnetic field to be set up.
In NMR we put the sample to be analysed in a magnetic field. The hydrogen nuclei (protons) either line up


with the field or, by spinning in the opposite direction, line up against the magnetic field (Figure 30.14).
this nucleus this nucleus
is lined up is lined up against


the applied the applied field


NMR spectrometer


Figure 30.14: Hydrogen nuclei will line up with or against a magnetic field.


 
There is a tiny difference in energy between the oppositely spinning +H nuclei. This difference corresponds
to the energy carried by waves in the radiowave range of the electromagnetic radiation spectrum. In NMR
spectroscopy, the nuclei ‘flip’ between the two energy levels (Figure 30.15). Only atoms whose mass


number is an odd number, e.g. 'H or !3C, absorb energy in the range of frequencies that is analysed.
this small difference in energy


lies in the radiowave range
  
    


 


‘against’


Energy
before field


is applied
 


 
‘with’


after field is applied
Figure 30.15: Hydrogen (1H) nuclei will absorb energy in the radiowave range when they ‘flip’ from the lower energy


level, lining up with the applied magnetic field, to the higher energy level, lining up against it.


 
The size of the gap between the nuclear energy levels varies slightly, depending on the location of other
atoms in the molecule (the molecular environment). Therefore, NMR can be used to identify 1H atoms in


different parts of a molecule.
You will find this easier to understand by looking at an example. If we look at a molecule of methanol,
we can see that there are 'H atoms in two different molecular environments. We have +H atoms in
both the group and the group. The energy absorbed by the 1H atoms in is different from


the energy absorbed by the !H atom in
In NMR spectroscopy, we vary the magnetic field as that is easier than varying the wavelength of radio
waves. As the magnetic field is varied, the 1H nuclei in different molecular environments flip at different
field strengths. The different field strengths are measured relative to a reference compound, which is given


a value of zero. The standard compound chosen is tetramethylsilane (TMS).
TMS is chosen because it is an inert, volatile liquid that mixes well with most organic compounds. Also, its
formula is Si(CH3)4, So all its H atoms are equivalent (i.e. they are all in the same molecular environment).
So, importantly, TMS only gives one sharp absorption, called a peak, and this peak is at a higher frequency
than most other protons (Figure 30.16). All other absorptions are measured by their shift away from the
sharp TMS peak on the NMR spectrum. This is called the chemical shift (5), and is measured in units of


parts per million (ppm).
   
  

 
single peak


of TMS
(which we use


as a standard)



0 chemical


shift (8)


Figure 30.16: The standard TMS peak used as a reference on NMR spectra.


 
Question
Discuss the following questions in a small group before writing your answers.


4 Explain why tetramethylsilane (TMS) is used as a standard in NMR spectroscopy.
NMR we use solvents such as tetrachloromethane to prepare samples for the machine (Figure


i Give the molecular formula of tetrachloromethane.
ii Suggest why tetrachloromethane is used as a solvent when preparing samples for NMR


analysis.
Solvents that contain deuterium, D, are also used as solvents in NMR. Deuterium is the 7H
isotope of hydrogen. A substance in which is replaced by 2H is said to be deuterated.


Suggest why the deuterated solvent would be used instead of CHCI3.


 


Figure 30.17: Samples dissolved in a solvent in narrow tubes ready for NMR analysis.


 

Low-resolution NMR
A low-resolution NMR spectrum shows a single peak for each non-equivalent hydrogen atom; an example is
shown in Figure 30.18.


3H
2H
1H



5.0
40 30 20 1.0 0.0


Absorption of energy


 


70 6.0


Figure 30.18: low-resolution NMR spectrum of ethanol,


 
Note how the zero reference point on the x-axis, chemical shift (5), is on the right of the spectrum and the


shift increases in value going left.
There are three peaks on ethanol’s low-resolution NMR spectrum. These correspond to the atoms in


and
Note how the heights of the three peaks vary. The area under each peak tells us the relative number of
equivalent +H atoms responsible for that particular chemical shift. The largest peak will be from the
hydrogen atoms, the middle peak from the hydrogen atoms and the smallest peak from the
hydrogen. The relative areas under the peaks are shown on the NMR spectrum by the labels 1H, 2H and 3H


(see Figure 30.17).
The type of H atom present can be checked against tables of data (Table 30.1) if you are using NMR to


identify unknown organic compounds.


alkyl next to electronegative atom


 
Table 30.1: Note: 6 values for O-H and N-H protons can vary depending on solvent and concentration. Ar is used to


represent an aromatic ring.


 


Using Table 30.1 we can see that:
e the peak at about 1.2 ppm is caused by the hydrogen atoms (range 0.9-1.7 ppm)
e the peak at about 3.7 ppm corresponds to hydrogen atoms (range 3.2-4.0 ppm)


the peak at about 5.4 ppm is due to the hydrogen atom.


Question
Discuss your answers to parts a-f together with a partner, taking turns to explain your reasoning to each


other.
the number of peaks and the relative areas under each peak, where appropriate, on the low-


resolution proton NMR spectrum of:
CH30H
b



f propanone.


Which spectra did you find most difficult? Why?


Which spectra were easiest?


Now check your answers against those provided to see if you were correct.


High-resolution NMR
As you can see in Table 30.1, the chemical shifts are given over ranges, and the ranges for different types
of hydrogen atoms do overlap. In some molecules where there is heavy shielding of the hydrogen nuclei by
lots of electrons in surrounding atoms, peaks are shifted beyond their usual range. In such cases high-


resolution NMR is useful.
High-resolution NMR gives us more information to interpret. Peaks that appear as one ‘signal’ on a low-
resolution NMR spectrum are often revealed to be made up of a cluster of closely grouped peaks. This is
because the magnetic fields generated by spinning nuclei interfere slightly with those of neighbouring


nuclei.
This interference is called spin-spin coupling. The exact splitting pattern of a peak depends on the


number of hydrogen atoms on the adjacent carbon atom or atoms.


IMPORTANT


 
number of signals a peak splits into = n + 1 where n is the number of atoms on the adjacent carbon


atom.


 
We can use the high-resolution NMR spectrum of ethanol to illustrate this ‘n + 1 rule’. The ‘n + 1 rule’ will
help you to interpret splitting patterns (Figure 30.19).
peak is split into three because there are two +H atoms on the adjacent group.
2)
This splitting pattern is called a triplet.
peak is split into four because there are three 'H atoms on the adjacent —CH3 group.
n+1=4(asn= 3)


This splitting is called a quartet.
peak is not usually split as its 'H atom is constantly being exchanged with the 1H atoms of


other ethanol molecules and any water present. This results in one average peak being produced.

Table 30.2 shows the relative intensities and distribution of the splitting patterns you are likely to meet.
Figure 30.20 shows another high-resolution NMR spectrum. You should try to interpret it by following these
steps:



Step 1: Use 6 values (chemical shift in ppm) to identify the environment of the equivalent protons (1H


atoms) present at each peak (remembering the peak at zero is the TMS standard reference peak).
Step 2: Look at the relative areas under each peak to determine how many of each type of non-equivalent


protons (1H atoms) are present.
Step 3: Apply the n + 1 rule to the splitting patterns to see which protons atoms) are on adjacent


carbon atoms in the unknown molecule.


Step 4: Put all this information together to identify the unknown molecule.


3H


2H


Absorption of energy
6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 25 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0



Figure 30.19: The high-resolution NMR spectrum of ethanol, showing the splitting pattern in two of the peaks. The area


under each series of peaks still represents the number of equivalent 1H atoms in the molecule, as in low-resolution NMR.

 
A


3H
>




3H


2H
2


< J


 


 


Chemical shift, ppm
Figure 30.20: The high-resolution NMR spectrum of an unknown ester in a glue. (See the Worked example on the next


page.)


 


1 peak, called a singlet


2 peaks, called a doublet


3 peaks, called a triplet


4 peaks, called a quartet


 


Table 30.2: Splitting patterns in high-resolution NMR spectra.


 


WORKED EXAMPLE
Anester is used as a solvent in a glue. A chemist was given a sample of the ester to analyse. The


NMR spectrum of the ester is shown in Figure 30.20. Identify the ester.


Solution
Step 1: Identify possibilities for the three major peaks that appear at chemical shifts of 1.3, 2.2


and 3.9 ppm. Using Table 30.1, these could be:
1.3 ppm R-CH,-,
2.2 RCH,CO- or


O-CH3,
Step 2: Use the relative numbers of each type of proton (1H atom), labelling each major peak to


narrow down possibilities.
1.3 ppm, labelled 3H, so could be R-CH3
2.2 ppm, labelled 3H, so could be


3.9 ppm, labelled 2H, so could be
Step 3: By applying the n + 1 rule to the splitting patterns we can see which protons (1H
atoms) are on adjacent carbon atoms.
1.3 ppm, labelled 3H and split into triplet, so R-CH3 would be next to a C atom bonded
to two 1H atoms (2 + 1 = 3, triplet) i.e. R =


2.2 ppm, labelled 3H and a singlet, so would be next to a C atom with no 1H
atoms attached (0 + 1 = 1, singlet). It could well be that the carbon, —CO-, is


also bonded to an atom, as in an ester, i.e. H3C-COOR.


 


 
3.9 ppm, labelled 2H and split into a quartet, would be next to a C atom


bonded to three 'H atoms (3 + 1 = 4, quartet), i.e. R = —CH3.


Step 4: Putting this information together we get the ester ethanoate,


 
Question


If possible, work as a small group to discuss and answer this question.
A pathologist was given a sample of a white tablet to identify. In order to complete her report, the
pathologist received an NMR spectrum of the sample (Figure 30.21a) and information from the police
that the tablets involved were either aspirin or paracetamol. The displayed formulae of both drugs are


also shown in Figure 30.21b.

Using this information, identify the drug in the white tablet. Explain your answer.
b Sketch the NMR spectrum you would expect to see if the other drug had undergone NMR analysis.
Label each peak with its relative area and the type of proton (1H) that caused it.


3H
>



o

& 1H
a
2H 2H

2
1H
11109 8 7 6 5 43 2 1
Chemical shift, ppm
b H °
H H
H H

N
H

H
H |



aspirin paracetamol


Figure 30.21: a NMR analysis of the unknown drug sample. b Structures of aspirin and paracetamol.


 


Identifying the or —NH signal in an NMR spectrum
The signal in the high-resolution NMR spectrum of ethanol appears as a single peak. As we have seen
earlier in this section, the peak is not split by the 1H atoms (protons) on the neighbouring group. The
reason for this is that the proton exchanges very rapidly with protons in any traces of water (or acid)


present, as follows:


+ HOH + HOH
The hydrogen atoms involved in this reversible proton exchange have been coloured red and blue. The
exchange takes place so rapidly that the signal for the protons becomes a single peak. This exchange


also happens in amines and amides which contain the group.


Table 30.3 shows the chemical shift ranges for the different -OH and signals.
As you can see from Table 30.1, these ranges overlap with the chemical shifts of other types of proton. The
signals can also appear outside the quoted ranges under certain conditions, e.g. choice of solvent or


concentration. This makes NMR spectra difficult to interpret.


 


Table 30.3: Chemical shift ranges for -OH and protons in different molecular environments.


 
However, there is a technique for positively identifying -OH or groups in a molecule. Their peaks


‘disappear’ from the spectra if you add a small amount of deuterium oxide, D0, to the sample. The
deuterium atoms (7H) in called ‘heavy water’, exchange reversibly with the protons in the -OH or


groups.


For example:
+ =-OD + HOD


+ = + HOD
The deuterium atoms do not absorb in the same region of the electromagnetic spectrum as protons (1H
atoms). This makes the or —NH- signal disappear from the NMR spectrum. By checking against the


peaks in the original NMR spectrum without we can tell if the -OH or groups are present in the


sample. The 7H atom in the or group is referred to as a ‘labile’ proton.


Question
7 Look back at Figure 30.19.


The high-resolution NMR spectrum shown is from a sample of ethanol containing traces of water.


Describe how the NMR spectrum would differ if had been added to the sample of ethanol.
b back at Question 6. How would repeating the NMR analysis using a solvent of help the

pathologist distinguish between aspirin and paracetamol?
Did Questions 6 and 7 reveal any areas of proton NMR analysis that you need more practise on? You
can try Exam-style Questions 2-5 to interpret more 'H NMR spectra.


30.5 Carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy
In addition to proton NMR, carbon-13 NMR is another analytical tool used frequently by organic chemists.
The vast majority of carbon atoms in any organic compound will be the carbon-12 isotope. This isotope has
an even mass number (12). Therefore, it has no signal on an NMR spectrum, as NMR only works with atoms


with an odd mass number (such as !H, as we have already seen).
However, about 1% of the carbon atoms in any sample of an organic compound will be the carbon-13
isotope. These nuclei will interact with the magnetic field applied in NMR analysis, so any organic


compound can produce an NMR spectrum.
Typical carbon-13 NMR shifts are shown in Table 30.4. As in proton NMR, the chemical shifts are measured


with reference to the TMS (tetramethylsilane) peak at 0 ppm on the spectrum (see Section 30.4).


IMPORTANT
Carbon-13 NMR produces a spectrum with different chemical shifts for non-equivalent carbon atoms in


a molecule.
alkyl CH3-, CH>-,
>C<


next to alkene / arene 25-50


next to carbonyl / carboxyl 30-65
sp2 alkene or arene 110-160


c
Table 30.4: Typical chemical shift values (5) relative to TMS = 0. Note that chemical shifts are typical values and can


vary slightly depending on the solvent, the concentration and substituents present.


 


 
Analysis of carbon-13 NMR spectra is similar to that of proton NMR, looking to match different chemical
shifts to characteristic molecular environments. However, the signals produced in carbon-13 NMR appear
as discrete vertical lines on the spectra. You do not find the complication of the splitting patterns caused by
the protons in atoms within the molecules. Take care in interpreting the carbon-13 NMR spectra because


the heights of the lines are not usually proportional to the number of equivalent 13C atoms present.


The solvent used to prepare samples for NMR analysis is This accounts for the small signal near
80 ppm that can be ignored when interpreting a spectrum, as it is caused by the atoms of in the


solvent molecules.


Figure 30.22 shows the NMR spectrum for propanone,


 


|



5 200 100


 


Figure 30.22: The carbon-13 NMR spectrum of propanone.


 
Note that there are only two peaks: one for the carbon atom in the carbonyl group, -C=O, and the other for
the carbon atoms in the methyl groups, Although there are two —CH3 groups in propanone, they are


equivalent and so appear as only a single peak (just as equivalent H atoms do in proton NMR).


Figure 30.23 shows another example; the carbon-13 NMR spectrum of ethylbenzene,


 
T


200 100 0


Figure 30.23: The carbon-13 NMR spectrum of ethylbenzene.


 
The carbon atoms in the benzene ring are almost equivalent but will be affected to slightly different
extents by the presence of the ethyl group in the molecule. Hence the series of lines clustered between


130 and 120 ppm.
Question
8 series of lines clustered between 130 and 120 ppm in Figure 30.23.
i One line is separated slightly from the main cluster.


Explain which carbon atom in ethylbenzene is most likely to have produced that signal.
Predict how many lines make up the tightly clustered grouping of the tallest line on the


spectrum.
Explain your reasoning.
b the number and location of signal lines in the carbon-13 NMR spectrum of benzene,
the number of signal peaks you would expect to see in the carbon-13 NMR spectrum of:

i propan-1-ol



REFLECTION
Compare your answers in Question 8 with those of another learner. Do you have any differences that
you need to discuss? Try to reach an agreed set of answers before checking against the answers


provided.
Which parts of Chapter 30 did you enjoy most / find most difficult / find easiest? Talk with your partner


about your reasons why.


 

SUMMARY

Chromatography separates mixtures of substances for identification. In chromatography, the mobile phase moves

the components of a mixture through or over the stationary phase. Separation occurs by the transfer of the

components to the stationary phase by:
partition between two liquids (due to the different solubility of solutes in the mobile phase and stationary phase),

or


partition between a gas and a liquid, or


e adsorption on a solid surface.


The stationary phase may be solid or liquid; the mobile phase may be liquid or gas.


In paper and thin-layer chromatography (TLC) the components of a mixture are identified by their values.
In gas-liquid chromatography (GLC), the components of a mixture are identified by their retention times; the
amount of each component is found by measuring the area under each peak (estimates can be made from narrow


or sharp peak heights).
The proton NMR spectrum of a compound provides detailed information about the structure of the compound. In
particular, the spectrum for the protons, 1H, in a compound can provide a complete determination of the


structure.
Protons in different chemical environments produce signals at different chemical shifts. The chemical shift


provides information about the proton’s environment.
Protons on neighbouring carbon atoms cause signals to be split. The splitting pattern establishes which groups of


protons are on adjacent carbon atoms. The ‘n + 1’ rule predicts the splitting pattern.
Protons on OH and NH can be identified by the addition of to the NMR sample, which collapses the peak due to


an or an proton.


Carbon-13 NMR can also help to determine the structure of organic molecules.
A combination of techniques, such as infrared (see Chapter 18), NMR and mass spectroscopy (see Chapter 3) must

be used to confirm the structure of newly discovered compounds.



gas-liquid chromatogram for a mixture of organic compounds is shown below.
905


604


50 4 pentan-1-ol
40-
A 30 J
204
104 B


pentane
 
 
  
 


   


octane


 


 
012345 67 8 9 1011 12 13 1415

Give the correct labels for A, B and C.


the percentage of pentan-1-ol in the mixture.


an explanation for the different retention times.


d i Describe how the chromatogram would change if the liquid in the stationary phase


was much more polar.


ii Explain your answer.


e Describe why gas-liquid chromatography is useful in testing for anabolic steroids in the


blood of athletes.


f why the use of gas-liquid chromatography linked to a mass spectrometer is


such a useful analytical technique.


g Suggest why it is difficult to separate dyes using gas-liquid chromatography.


When answering Questions 2-5, you will need to use the values in Table 30.1.


2
Compound B has the composition 62.1% carbon, 10.3% hydrogen and 27.6% oxygen.


Its mass spectrum and 'H NMR spectrum are shown below.



Relative abundance
O 1


10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70


Mass-to-charge ratio (m/e)


 


 


 

 
>


triplet (3H)
triplet (1H)



3


<



9 8 7 6 4 3 2


Chemical shift, 5/ppm


the empirical formula of B.


[Total:


b the mass spectrum, find the molecular mass of B and hence its molecular formula.


Draw displayed formulae for the possible isomers of B which contain a carbonyl
group,


ii Use the 1H NMR spectrum of B to decide which isomer is B.


iii Explain your reasoning.


what caused the peak at 6 = 1.1 ppm, and why it is split into a triplet in the 1H
NMR spectrum of B.


e Predict the number of signal lines present on the carbon-13 NMR spectrum of:


i compound B, stating the origin of each line


ii the isomer of compound B identified in your answer to part i, stating the origin of


each line.
Arene C has the composition 90.6% carbon and 9.4% hydrogen.


Its mass spectrum and +H NMR spectrum are shown below.
100
80
60
40


20


Relative abundance



50 60 70 80 90 100 110


Mass-to-charge ratio (m/e)


 



10 20


 


 


Absorption of energy
4


Chemical shift,







the empirical formula of C.


[Total:


b the mass spectrum, find the molecular mass of C and hence its molecular formula.


c Draw displayed formulae for the possible aryl (aromatic) isomers of C.
ii When C is treated with chlorine in the presence of AICI3 it undergoes electrophilic
substitution. In this reaction one of the hydrogen atoms bonded directly to the
benzene ring is replaced with one chlorine atom, and one single aromatic product is


formed. Consider this evidence and the NMR spectrum of C to decide which isomer


Explain the main features of the 1H NMR spectrum of C.


Compound D has the composition 77.8% carbon, 7.41% hydrogen and 14.8% oxygen.


Its mass spectrum and +H NMR spectrum are shown below.


[Total:


 
[3]
[6]


[3]
[1]


[2]


[2]


[2]
[2]


21]
[2]


[2]
[2]
[1]


[3]


[2]


[2]
[2]


16]
[2]
[2]


[4]

[5]
[4]
17]


Relative abundance


 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110


Mass-to-charge ratio (m/e)


 


 


 



~



w



°
Absorption of energy




Chemical shift,


the empirical formula of D. [2]
b the mass spectrum, find the molecular mass of D (ignoring the peak) and


hence its molecular formula. [2]
| Draw displayed formulae for five possible isomers of D that benzene ring. [5]
Use the NMR spectrum of D to deduce which isomer is D.


Explain why you chose this isomer. [3]
Explain why there are three main peaks on the NMR spectrum of D, and identify the


protons responsible for the peak at 7.3 ppm. [2]


[Total: 15]
Compound E has the composition 69.8% carbon, 11.6% hydrogen and 18.6% oxygen.


Its mass and +H NMR spectra are shown below.

 

100

80

z

60

o 40



20





10 20 30 40 SO 60 70 80
Mass-to-charge ratio (m/e)


singlet (9H)
singlet (1H)


|

1211109 8 7 6 43 2 1


Chemical shift, 5/ppm


 


Absorption of energy

 
the empirical formula of E. [2]

b the mass spectrum, find the molecular mass of E (ignoring the 13C peak) and
hence its molecular formula. [2]

Compound E reacts with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine to give a yellow-orange precipitate.
Draw displayed formulae for the seven possible isomers of E.


d Compound E gives a silver mirror with Tollens’ reagent.


Identify the functional group in E. [3]

the 'H NMR spectrum to identify E.
Explain your reasoning. [4]
[Total: 18]


SELF-EVALUATION
See Needs to

section... more work there move on
explain and use the term value’ in thin-layer 30.1, 30.2

chromatography

explain and use retention time in gas-liquid chromatography,
and interpret gas-liquid chromatograms to find the percentage | 30.3

composition of a mixture

analyse a carbon-13 NMR spectrum of a simple molecule to
deduce the different environments of the carbon atoms 30.5

present and the possible structures for the molecule


predict the number of peaks in a carbon-13 NMR spectrum for 30.5


a given molecule
analyse and interpret a proton NMR spectrum of a simple
molecule to deduce:
the different types of proton present
the relative numbers of each type of proton present
the number of non-equivalent protons adjacent to a given
proton


the possible structures for the molecule
predict the chemical shifts (6) and splitting patterns of the


signals in an NMR spectrum, given the molecule
in obtaining an NMR spectrum, describe the use of
tetramethylsilane, TMS, as the standard for chemical shift 30.4
measurements, and the need for deuterated solvents, e.g.



describe the identification of O-H and N-H protons by proton 30.4


exchange using D20.


 

images



P2.1 Introduction
The ability to plan, analyse and evaluate practical work requires higher-order thinking skills. You will need
plenty of practice in carrying out tasks requiring these skills as you progress through your course (Figure


P2.1).


 


Figure P2.1 Many chemists are employed to plan, carry out and evaluate tests on substances found in the environment.


 


Written examination of practical skills
Paper 5 in the Cambridge International A Level Chemistry syllabus is the written examination of practical
skills. It focuses on the higher-order experimental skills of planning, analysis and evaluation. Some
questions on this paper may be set in areas of chemistry that are difficult to investigate experimentally and


some may be based on new situations.
Before going through the following section, it would be a good idea to read Chapter P1, Practical skills 1.
This will remind you of the structure of investigations. This is essential to understand before you can apply


the higher-order practical skills tested in Paper 5.
P2.2 Planning


Expectations
Defining the problem


You should be able to:
e identify the independent variable in the experiment or investigation


e identify the dependent variable in the experiment or investigation
formulate the aim in terms of a prediction or hypothesis, and express this in words or in the form of a


predicted graph

identify the variables that are to be controlled.

Methods

You should be able to:
e describe the method to be used to vary the independent variable, and the means that you propose to

ensure that you have measured its values accurately


e describe how you will measure the dependent variable


describe how you will control each of the other key variables
explain how you will use any control experiments to verify that it is the independent variable that is

affecting the dependent variable and not some other factor
describe the arrangement of apparatus and the steps in the procedure to be followed

suggest appropriate volumes and concentrations of reagents

assess the risks of your proposed methods

e describe precautions that should be taken to keep risks to a minimum


draw up tables for data that you might wish to record


describe how the data might be used in order to reach a conclusion.


As the expectations above show, all plans contain two distinct sections:


e defining the problem


the actual method.


Defining the problem
The question generally begins with a stem, which will contain information relevant to the plan and the aim
of the investigation. The context of the task to be covered may or may not be familiar to you, but the stem


will contain all the detail required.
Almost invariably, a prediction is required and, together with an explanation of the basis of the prediction,
they form a hypothesis to test. For example, in a question about rate of reaction, you might make a
quantitative prediction, such as the direct proportionality between the rate and concentration. Here, the
supporting explanation would need to be given in terms of the doubling of the frequency of particle
collisions as a result of doubling the concentration. The planning question might also ask you to give a


supporting sketch graph.
You will have to specify the independent and the dependent variables. You might also have to consider the

need to control other variables.
In a ‘rate’ exercise, the independent variable might be the concentration of a reactant or the temperature.
The measured rate of the reaction at different values of the independent variable is the dependent
variable. Alternative ways of measuring the rate of reaction, such as the time to collect a set volume of gas
(giving average rates) or the monitoring of gas released over time (then calculating the initial gradient of
lines on a graph to measure initial rates), are acceptable.


Methods
When creating a method, you should produce one that can be followed by another learner without the need
to ask any extra questions. This means that fine detail is required and nothing should be left out just


because you think it is ‘obvious’.
The question might provide further information that builds on the stem, but you are expected to have
experience of basic laboratory apparatus. The best way to achieve this is to follow a programme of
experimental work throughout the course. This also has the advantage of promoting the understanding of


concepts underlying the practical work.
Basic techniques, such as titrations, standard solution production and rate measurement, should be
thoroughly understood in detail. You also need to be aware of the various methods of measuring volume
and mass available in a laboratory. For example, an experiment involving the production and collection of a
gas, such as the effect of heat on nitrates, would require you to be aware that gas syringes usually have a
maximum capacity of 100 cm3. An alternative method to collect the gas over water in a burette would
allow for the collection of only 50 This example shows how it is important to perform meaningful
practical work in order to prepare for Paper 5. There is no substitute for familiarity in handling real


apparatus.
On occasion, you could be asked to draw a diagram of the apparatus to be used. You need to be able to
represent the apparatus in a simple and understandable format. It is essential that each piece of


equipment can be easily recognised in the diagram. Practice drawing sessions are a very good idea.
Relevant calculations are an almost routine requirement, and these must be logically presented, step by


step.
The preparation of a standard solution of a solid acid, such as ethanedioic acid, requires the calculation of
the mass to be dissolved in a chosen volumetric flask in order to produce the required concentration. The
described procedure should indicate that the solid needs to be dissolved completely in distilled water
before adding the solution to the volumetric flask (see Figure P2.2). You should make clear how you can
ensure that all of this solution is transferred successfully to the volumetric flask. For example, you would
rinse any solution stuck on the inside of the original container into the volumetric flask using distilled
water. Once in the volumetric flask, the solution is made up to the required mark, and must then be


thoroughly mixed.


 


Figure P2.2 Volumetric flasks are used to make up standard solutions of known concentration accurately.


 
You are expected to calculate the amounts of substance used to suit the volume or size of the apparatus
that you specify. For example, if the plan involves collecting a gas from the decomposition of a carbonate in
a 100 cm? gas syringe, the calculated mass of the solid to be heated should be such as to produce slightly


less than 100 of the gas.
An important part of any plan is the collection and presentation of results. Any processing of the results
must be specified, and the figures obtained should also be presented as the ‘derived results’. The derived
results may then be processed in order to confirm or deny (falsify) the original prediction or hypothesis.


This processing may involve calculating means of repeat readings and the graphical presentation of results.
The recorded results are those collected from the various steps taken in carrying out the procedure. For
example, in an exercise to find the enthalpies of solution of Group 1 hydroxides, the necessary results

columns to be recorded are:

e the name or nature of the hydroxide


the mass of a weighing bottle
the mass of the weighing bottle and a sample of the hydroxide


e the initial temperature of the water


e the final temperature of the solution.
If you plan to repeat any tests to get replicate results, extra columns must be added to the results table.

Each column should have the correct units: for example, represented as either g’ or ‘(g)’ for any mass.

The next stage is to process the results:

1 calculate the mass of hydroxide used

2 calculate the number of moles of hydroxide used


the number of joules of energy released into the solution
4 use the results to parts 2 and 3 to deduce the standard enthalpy change per mole of hydroxide.


All plans have to be assessed for risk. Examination questions can ask for:
of the risks involved in a particular experiment
how to deal with the risks


both of the above.
In an exercise to determine the enthalpy of neutralisation of hydrochloric acid (the question will tell you
that this is ‘harmful’) and sodium hydroxide (which is ‘corrosive’), you could be asked about a suitable
precaution. Alternatively, an experiment on solubility may have hot water as a possible hazard. If a toxic
gas is formed, as in the decomposition of Group 2 nitrates, the investigation should be carried out in a


fume hood.

Points to remember
When planning an investigation, your method must be ordered in a logical sequence. Therefore, you
might prefer to make some rough notes at the back of the examination paper before writing a bullet-
pointed list or flow chart that explains exactly how you would carry out the investigation. These could
include diagrams of the assembled apparatus instead of complicated written explanations of the set-


up.
When describing how to vary your independent variable, make sure that you consider how to measure
its values accurately. For example, in a rate of precipitation investigation, when varying the
concentration of a solution, you might choose to measure volumes of water and solution using
volumetric pipettes and fillers rather than just using a measuring cylinder (see Figure P2.3). You should
also be familiar with the volumes and masses of reagents that are reasonable to use in normal
everyday laboratory work. For example, a volume of 15 cm? of solution would be suitable for an


experiment in a boiling tube but not in a 250 cm? conical flask.
When deciding how to measure the dependent variable, you should also consider accuracy: how you
intend to measure its ‘true’ value. In a rate of precipitation investigation, you might choose to carry out
the reaction in a conical flask on top of a piece of paper with a pencil mark drawn on it. You could then
time how long it takes for the pencil mark to be no longer visible when viewed from above the flask.
This will involve a subjective judgement by the observer. If you have done an experiment like this
before, you will know just how difficult it is to decide the exact moment when you can no longer see
through the solution. So including a very accurate timing device, reading to one-thousandth of a

second, would not be appropriate for this method.
You might also be required to sketch the axes you would use to graph the data collected and describe
how you would use the data to draw a conclusion.


 
Figure P2.3 Volumetric and graduated pipettes are used to transfer accurate volumes of liquid. Volumetric pipettes give


greater accuracy than graduated pipettes, due to the single line to measure to on the thin section above the bulge.


 


Question
experiment to determine the formula of an oxide of copper, the copper oxide was reduced by
hydrogen gas. The hydrogen was passed over the oxide of copper in a boiling tube with a hole near its
end. The excess hydrogen was burnt off at this hole. The copper oxide was placed inside the boiling


tube, which was clamped in a horizontal position, in a porcelain boat and heated strongly.
the products of the reaction.
a labelled diagram of the apparatus.


c a list of the measurements you would make to find the formula of the oxide of copper.
how you would work out, using the measurements, the mass contained in the oxide of


copper of:
i copper


ii oxygen
e experiment was carried out by ten groups of learners, each with a different initial mass of the
oxide of copper. Sketch a graph with the line you would expect to enable you to work out the


formula.
P2.3 Analysis, conclusions and evaluation

Expectations

Dealing with data

You should be able to:
e identify the calculations and means of presentation of data that are necessary to be able to draw


conclusions from provided data


use calculations to enable simplification or explanation of data
use tables and graphs to draw attention to the key points in quantitative data, including the variability

of data.

Evaluation

You should be able to:
identify anomalous values in provided data and suggest appropriate means of dealing with such


anomalies


within familiar contexts, suggest possible explanations for anomalous readings
identify the extent to which provided readings have been adequately replicated, and describe the


adequacy of the range of data provided
use provided information to assess the extent to which selected variables have been effectively


controlled.


Conclusions


You should be able to:
e draw conclusions from an investigation, providing a detailed description of the key features of the data
and analyses, and considering whether experimental data supports a given hypothesis

make detailed scientific explanations of the data, analyses and conclusions that you have described
make further predictions, ask informed and relevant questions and suggest improvements.


P2.4 The three remaining skills
The three remaining skills are Dealing with data, Evaluation and Conclusions. You should revise Section


P1.4 before reading the following advice.


Dealing with data
In a written practical paper, you will often be presented with some data, usually in a table, derived from an
experiment. The details of the experiment will be given to you, and then you will be asked to process the
data and produce a system that incorporates all the results and allows not only correct patterns to become
apparent but also detects anomalous results. The tabulated results will be the measured quantities of the


processes carried out in a laboratory.
For example, in an experiment to confirm the formula of zinc iodide by reacting excess zinc with iodine, the


measurements would be:
mass of an empty test-tube
mass of the test-tube and zinc powder


mass of the test-tube, zinc powder and iodine
mass of the test-tube and excess of zinc.


From these you would calculate:


the mass of zinc used


the mass of iodine that reacted with that mass of zinc.
These results would be tabulated, possibly alongside the original data, with each column showing the


appropriate units and an expression to show how the values were calculated.
All calculations should be correct and recorded to an appropriate number of significant figures and / or
decimal places. The question will sometimes tell you the degree of accuracy required, but often you will


need to decide this yourself.
Many balances weigh to the nearest 0.01 g, and hence masses should be recorded to 2 decimal places,
remembering that whole number masses should be recorded to the same accuracy, e.g. 4.00 g. In other
circumstances, derived data should be recorded to the same number of significant figures as the least
accurate item of supplied data. Where you are in doubt, 3 significant figures is appropriate for most


calculations.
Having processed the raw data, the next step involves either a series of calculations to be averaged or


some form of graphical plot.
In the zinc iodide experiment already discussed, the ratio of the number of moles of iodine to the number


of moles of zinc can be used to produce a series of ratios.
These ratios can then either be averaged, excluding any anomalies, to produce an appropriate result, or a
graph could be plotted of the two molar values. In this case, the appropriate gradient of the line would
indicate the formula of zinc iodide. For example, if you plot the number of moles of zinc on the x-axis and
the number of moles of iodine on the y-axis, the gradient of the line on the graph should be 2. This shows


that the formula of zinc iodide is
The first step in plotting a graph is an appropriate choice of scales for the two axes, with the independent
variable along the x-axis (the horizontal axis). When choosing a suitable scale, it is useful to remember that


the plotted points should be spread over at least half of each axis.
You must decide whether or not the origin (0,0) is a point on your graph. Whether or not to include the
origin will usually be clear from the nature of the results. For example, if the concentration of a reactant is
shown to affect the rate of a reaction, it is reasonable to assume that if the reactant were absent the
reaction would not occur, so the rate would be zero when the concentration was zero. The origin can then
provide a further useful point to be plotted. Chosen scales should be easily readable, but errors are
counted if unhelpful scales are used. For example, the division of each of the two-centimetre squares on


the graph grid into three makes accurate plotting very difficult.


Each of the plotted points can best be shown as a small x or +, made with a hard, sharp, pencil.
Most plotted points will show a clear trend, indicating whether the graph should be a straight line or a
curve; a straight line is the more usual. The plotted points must first be assessed to identify any anomalous
points. If any anomalous points are identified, they should be clearly labelled as such. The line of best fit is
then drawn, either as a curve or straight line. This line may not pass through all, or indeed any, of the
plotted points. As a rough guide, an equal number of points should lie on the left of the line and on the


right of the line, producing an ‘average’ line.


Evaluation
You can approach the evaluation of a set of results in a number of ways. The aim of any experiment is to
draw an appropriate conclusion, either to verify a relationship or to establish a new relationship. This is


accomplished by looking at the nature of the results and the quality of the experiment itself.
When anomalous results are identified, they should be clearly labelled as such. The source of the anomaly
will often need to be identified and will usually fall into one of two categories: either a positive or a


negative deviation from the general trend.
In a reaction involving the reduction of a metal oxide, the anomaly might arise because the reduction was


incomplete, leading to a larger than expected mass of metal. The excess mass is the unreacted oxide.
If the reaction involves the thermal decomposition of hydrated sulfate, two opposite errors are


possible:


insufficient heating: this will cause the residual mass to be too great


overheating: this will cause the residual mass to be too small.
The former result corresponds to the incomplete removal of the water of crystallisation, whereas the latter


relates to the decomposition of the sulfate into iron oxide.
You may be called upon to consider whether the actual experimental data under consideration is of high
enough quality to produce reliable results, and appropriate improvements may be requested. If the results
provide poor support for a conclusion, it may be that further repeats are needed, or that the range of


results needs to be extended.


Apparatus may need to considered from two viewpoints:


e is it appropriate?


e is it accurate?
In the measurement of volume, burettes and pipettes are more accurate than measuring cylinders, but if


the volume to be measured is large, a measuring cylinder could be perfectly adequate.
An experiment measuring a small temperature change in an enthalpy exercise often involves volumes of
the order of 25 cm? to 50 cm? and a typical temperature change of the order of 5 °C to 10 °C, using a
thermometer accurate to the nearest degree. In this case, the volumes could safely be measured with a
measuring cylinder, as the percentage error of the temperature change will be greater than that of the


measuring cylinder.
The volumes measured during titrations are about as accurate as simple exercises can be. If these are


involved in an experiment the source of any error is likely to be elsewhere.
Measuring small volumes or masses generally produces high percentage errors, whichever item of simple
laboratory apparatus is used. As an example, an experiment to investigate the rate of reaction between
hydrochloric acid and magnesium by measuring the volume of hydrogen produced requires less than 0.10
g of magnesium if the gas produced is to be collected in a 100 cm? syringe. This is a very small mass of
magnesium. Using a typical balance accurate to 0.01 g would give a 10% error and consequently the
accuracy of the syringe is of negligible significance. The error in measuring the mass of the magnesium will


be the greatest percentage error.

Conclusions
The conclusion of an exercise draws upon the key features of data collected and the subsequent analyses.
Usually the data given will support a given hypothesis. However, it must be clearly understood that data
that do not support an initial suggestion might also have to be considered.



In the magnesium / acid reaction, processing could involve plotting a graph of rate against the relative
concentration of the acid. Inspection of the graph would allow a deduction to be made about the order with
respect to in the rate equation. This conclusion would then be considered in the light of an original
hypothesis. This, in turn, could lead to further predictions and experiments (see Section P1.4 in Chapter



If the experiment is considered to be too approximate, suggested improvements to the exercise might be


requested.


Points to remember
Calculations involving data collected may ask for the mean, median, mode, percentage loss or percentage


gain.
e To calculate the mean, add up the individual values in a set and divide by the number of values. Take
care not to quote the mean to an unrealistic number of significant figures. The mean should reflect the


precision of the measurements from which it was calculated.
The median is the middle result when all the results are put in order of magnitude.


The mode is the most common value.
Percentage loss or gain is calculated by dividing the actual loss or gain by the original value, then


multiplying by 100.
The interval of the independent variable should be consistent when planning an investigation. However,
additional values can be selected to look more closely where a pattern seems to change (e.g. the gradient
of a line changes on a graph of your results) or to extend the limits of your original range below its
minimum value or above its maximum value. For example, you might decide to test a much lower dilution
of 0.01 mol when investigating the effect of concentration on the rate of reaction. This would enable


you to test if the trend you see within your original range of data continues as expected.


Question
2 Inthe experiment described in Question 1, a learner weighed a mass of 11.35 g of the oxide of
copper on a balance reading to the nearest 0.05 g. What was the percentage error in this


measurement?
Another group of learners carrying out the same experiment found that their sample of the oxide
of copper contained 13.24 g of copper and 3.26 g of oxygen. What is the most likely formula of


the oxide of copper? (Relative atomic mass of Cu = 63.5; O = 16.0.)
Nine out of the ten groups who tackled the experiment obtained results consistent with those of
the group described in part b. The other group’s measurements resulted in a ratio that suggested


the formula of the oxide was Cu,0.
i What do we call their result when plotted on a class graph of moles of oxygen against moles


of copper?


ii would you deal with this result when drawing the line of best fit?


a possible explanation for the result obtained.


SUMMARY


In the written practical examination, you will be tested on your skills of planning, analysis and evaluation.
The planning skill can be split into two sections.


a_ Defining the problem, where you should:
e identify the independent variable, the dependent variable, and the variables that are to be controlled in the


experiment or investigation


e formulate a prediction or hypothesis, and


b Describing a method.
The analysis and evaluation skills include:
using calculations to simplify or explain data
using tables and graphs to interpret data
identifying and dealing with anomalous data
considering the precision of data
assessing the control of variables in tests.
making detailed explanations of the data, analyses and conclusions

making further predictions, asking questions and suggesting improvements.



EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS


 
in a gas is the random motion of particles involved in the net movement of a substance
from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration. The process of diffusion also
takes place in solution. Medical scientists are interested in the rate of diffusion of pharmaceutical
compounds through tumours. They can model the factors that affect the rate of diffusion of these
drugs by conducting investigations using coloured compounds (to model the drugs) and gelatin, a


jelly-like substance (to model the tumours).
The kinetic energy of particles depends on their mass and the speed they travel at. So at a given


temperature, large particles will travel slower on average than smaller particles.
Imagine that you are a member of a research team trying to find out how the rate of diffusion


through gelatin depends on the relative molecular mass (M,) of a drug.


a
i Predict how you think that the rate of diffusion will be affected as the relative [2]


molecular mass of a drug increases. Explain your reasoning.
2


ii Sketch your prediction on a graph, including any relevant units.
In the experiment you are about to plan, identify:


[1]


[1]
the independent variable


ii the dependent variable.
The research team can make thin discs of gelatin to cover the central area of Petri
dishes, leaving space around the edge of each disc to place a solution of the coloured


dyes under investigation.


TOP VIEW


Petri dish


    

gelatin disc

solution of dye
placed in gap between


the gelatin disc and


the edge of the Petri dish


CROSS-SECTIONAL SIDE VIEW
Petri dish


gelatin disc of


3mm height


 
You have been given five coloured powders of dyes, labelled A to E, to test. These have
relative molecular masses of 486, 534, 686, 792 and 886, respectively. You are also
provided with a stopclock / watch and a ruler with a millimetre scale. You can also use
any other common laboratory apparatus needed to complete the investigation. The
diffusion is a slow process and the team carry out some trial runs to get a rough idea
how quickly the dyes diffuse through the gelatin. They decide to monitor the experiment


for 72 hours.
Consider the information above and describe how you would carry out the experiment,


making sure that you include:


how to ensure the same number of dye molecules is used in each test
how to ensure that the Petri dish is kept under the same conditions throughout all of


the experiments to measure the rate of diffusion
[6]


how to produce reliable results.
Two of the dyes are classified as ‘harmful’ and are hazardous if absorbed through the [2]

skin or are inhaled. State any precautions you would take to minimise the risk.


Draw a table with headings that show clearly the data you would record when carrying
out your experiments and any values you would need to calculate in order to construct a
graph to check your prediction in part a. The headings must include the appropriate [2]

units. Ensure that the table covers all the detail relating to the five dyes listed in part c.
[Total: 16]


Appendix 1


The Periodic Table of the Elements


 


 


Appendix 2


Selected standard electrode potentials
Electrode reaction
Agt + 0.80
+ 2e7 =
+ — 2.87
+ 2e7 + 1.36
+ + + + 0.89
Cr2+ + 0.91
cr3+ + 3e7 0.74
+ 14H* + = 2Cr3+ +
+ 0.52
+ = Cut
+
+ 2e7 = + 2.87
Fe2* + = Fe 0.44
Fe3+ + =
Fe3+ + 3e7 0.04
+ 2e7 0.00
+ + — 0.83
+ 2H* + =
+ 2e7 + 0.54
— 2.92
Mg2+ + = Mg — 2.38
Mn?* + = Mn
+ + = + 4H,0
+ 2e7 = Ni

+ 2H* + +
+ 10H* + = + 3H20 + 0.87



nitrite, NH3 liberated on heating with OH~(aq) and Al foil; NO liberated by dilute acids (colourless NO


(pale) brown in air)


sulfate, gives white precipitate with Ba2+(aq) (insoluble in excess dilute strong acids)
sulfite, liberated on warming with dilute acids; gives white precipitate with Ba2*(aq) (soluble in


excess dilute strong acids)


thiosulfate, | gives white precipitate slowly with


3 Tests for gases


 


4 Test for an element in aqueous solution


 

gives blue-black colour on addition of starch solution
